

 Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Complete
by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

This eBook is for  use of anyone anywhere at no cost  with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under  terms of  Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

Title: Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Complete

Author: Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

Release Date: August 20, 2006 [EBook #76]

Last Updated: August 17, 2016]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HUCKLEBERRY FINN ***

Produced by David Widger





ADVENTURES

OF

HUCKLEBERRY FINN

(Tom Sawyer’s Comrade)

By Mark Twain

Complete




CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I. Civilizing Huck.--Miss Watson.--Tom Sawyer Waits.

CHAPTER II.  Boys Escape Jim.--Torn Sawyer’s Gang.--Deep-laid Plans.

CHAPTER III. A Good Going-over.--Grace Triumphant.--“One of Tom Sawyers’s
Lies”.

CHAPTER IV. Huck   Judge.--Superstition.

CHAPTER V. Huck’s Far.-- Fond Parent.--Reform.

CHAPTER VI. He Went for Judge Thatcher.--Huck Decided to Leave.--Political
Economy.--Thrashing Around.

CHAPTER VII. Laying for Him.--Locked in  Cabin.--Sinking 
Body.--Resting.

CHAPTER VIII. Sleeping in  Woods.--Raising  Dead.--Exploring 
Isl.--Finding Jim.--Jim’s Escape.--Signs.--Balum.

CHAPTER IX.  Cave.-- Floating House.

CHAPTER X.  Find.--Old Hank Bunker.--In Disguise.

CHAPTER XI. Huck   Woman.-- Search.--Prevarication.--Going to
Goshen.

CHAPTER XII. Slow Navigation.--Borrowing Things.--Boarding  Wreck.--
Plotters.--Hunting for  Boat.

CHAPTER XIII. Escaping from  Wreck.-- Watchman.--Sinking.

CHAPTER XIV. A General Good Time.-- Harem.--French.

CHAPTER XV. Huck Loses  Raft.--In  Fog.--Huck Finds  Raft.--Trash.

CHAPTER XVI. Expectation.--A White Lie.--Floating Currency.--Running by
Cairo.--Swimming Ashore.

CHAPTER XVII. An Evening Call.-- Farm in Arkansaw.--Interior
Decorations.--Stephen Dowling Bots.--Poetical Effusions.

CHAPTER XVIII. Col. Grangerford.--Aristocracy.--Feuds.--
Testament.--Recovering  Raft.-- Wood--pile.--Pork  Cabbage.

CHAPTER XIX. Tying Up Day--times.--An Astronomical ory.--Running a
Temperance Revival.-- Duke of Bridgewater.-- Troubles of Royalty.

CHAPTER XX. Huck Explains.--Laying Out a Campaign.--Working 
Camp--meeting.--A Pirate at  Camp--meeting.-- Duke as a Printer.

CHAPTER XXI. Sword Exercise.--Hamlet’s Soliloquy.--y Loafed Around
Town.--A Lazy Town.--Old Boggs.--Dead.

CHAPTER XXII. Sherburn.--Attending  Circus.--Intoxication in 
Ring.-- Thrilling Tragedy.

CHAPTER XXIII. Sold.--Royal Comparisons.--Jim Gets Home-sick.

CHAPTER XXIV. Jim in Royal Robes.--y Take a Passenger.--Getting
Information.--Family Grief.

CHAPTER XXV. Is It m?--Singing  “Doxologer.”--Awful Square--Funeral
Orgies.--A Bad Investment .

CHAPTER XXVI. A Pious King.-- King’s Clergy.--She Asked His
Pardon.--Hiding in  Room.--Huck Takes  Money.

CHAPTER XXVII.  Funeral.--Satisfying Curiosity.--Suspicious of
Huck,--Quick Sales  Small.

CHAPTER XXVIII.  Trip to Engl.--“ Brute!”--Mary Jane Decides to
Leave.--Huck Parting with Mary Jane.--Mumps.-- Opposition Line.

CHAPTER XXIX. Contested Relationship.-- King Explains  Loss.--A
Question of Hwriting.--Digging up  Corpse.--Huck Escapes.

CHAPTER XXX.  King Went for Him.--A Royal Row.--Powerful Mellow.

CHAPTER XXXI. Ominous Plans.--News from Jim.--Old Recollections.--A Sheep
Story.--Valuable Information.

CHAPTER XXXII. Still  Sunday--like.--Mistaken Identity.--Up a Stump.--In
a Dilemma.

CHAPTER XXXIII. A Nigger Stealer.--Sourn Hospitality.--A Pretty Long
Blessing.--Tar  Fears.

CHAPTER XXXIV.  Hut by  Ash Hopper.--Outrageous.--Climbing 
Lightning Rod.--Troubled with Witches.

CHAPTER XXXV. Escaping Properly.--Dark Schemes.--Discrimination in
Stealing.--A Deep Hole.

CHAPTER XXXVI.  Lightning Rod.--His Level Best.--A Bequest to
Posterity.--A High Figure.

CHAPTER XXXVII.  Last Shirt.--Mooning Around.--Sailing Orders.--
Witch Pie.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.  Coat of Arms.--A Skilled Superintendent.--Unpleasant
Glory.--A Tearful Subject.

CHAPTER XXXIX. Rats.--Lively Bed--fellows.-- Straw Dummy.

CHAPTER XL. Fishing.-- Vigilance Committee.--A Lively Run.--Jim Advises
a Doctor.

CHAPTER XLI.  Doctor.--Uncle Silas.--Sister Hotchkiss.--Aunt Sally in
Trouble.

CHAPTER XLII. Tom Sawyer Wounded.-- Doctor’s Story.--Tom
Confesses.--Aunt Polly Arrives.--H Out m Letters    .

CHAPTER  LAST. Out of Bondage.--Paying  Captive.--Yours Truly, Huck
Finn.




ILLUSTRATIONS.

 Widows

Moses   “Bulrushers”

Miss Watson

Huck Stealing Away

y Tip-toed Along

Jim

Tom Sawyer’s B of Robbers  

Huck Creeps into his Window

Miss Watson’s Lecture

 Robbers Dispersed

Rubbing  Lamp

! ! ! !

Judge Thatcher surprised

Jim Listening

“Pap”

Huck  his Far

Reforming  Drunkard

Falling from Grace

 Widows

Moses   “Bulrushers”

Miss Watson

Huck Stealing Away

y Tip-toed Along

Jim

Tom Sawyer’s B of Robbers  

Huck Creeps into his Window

Miss Watson’s Lecture

 Robbers Dispersed

Rubbing  Lamp

! ! ! !

Judge Thatcher surprised

Jim Listening

“Pap”

Huck  his Far

Reforming  Drunkard

Falling from Grace

Getting out of  Way

Solid Comfort

Thinking it Over

Raising a Howl

“Git Up”

 Shanty

Shooting  Pig

Taking a Rest

In  Woods

Watching  Boat

Discovering  Camp Fire

Jim   Ghost

Misto Bradish’s Nigger

Exploring  Cave

In  Cave

Jim sees a Dead Man

y Found Eight Dollars

Jim   Snake

Old Hank Bunker

“A Fair Fit”

“Come In”

“Him  anor Man”

She puts up a Snack

“Hump Yourself”

On  Raft

He sometimes Lifted a Chicken

“Please don’t, Bill”

“It ain’t Good Morals”

“Oh! Lordy, Lordy!”

In a Fix

“Hello, What’s Up?”

 Wreck

We turned in  Slept

Turning over  Truck

Solomon  his Million Wives

 story of “Sollermun”

“We Would Sell  Raft”

Among  Snags

Asleep on  Raft

“Something being Raftsman”

“Boy, that’s a Lie”

“Here I is, Huck”

Climbing up  Bank

“Who’s re?”

“Buck”

“It made Her look Spidery”

“y got him out  emptied Him”  

 House

Col. Grangerford

Young Harney Shepherdson

Miss Charlotte

“ asked me if I Liked Her”

“Behind  Wood-pile”

Hiding Day-times

“ Dogs a-Coming”

“By rights I am a Duke!”

“I am  Late Dauphin”

Tail Piece

On  Raft

 King as Juliet

“Courting on  Sly”

“A Pirate for Thirty Years”

Anor little Job

Practizing

Hamlet’s Soliloquy

“Gimme a Chaw”

A Little Monthly Drunk

 Death of Boggs

Sherburn steps out

A Dead Head

He shed Seventeen Suits

Tragedy

ir Pockets Bulged

Henry  Eighth in Boston Harbor

Harmless

Adolphus

He fairly emptied that Young Fellow

“Alas, our Poor Bror”

“You Bet it is”

Leaking

Making up  “Deffisit”

Going for him

 Doctor

 Bag of Money

 Cubby

Supper with  Hare-Lip

Honest Injun

 Duke looks under  Bed

Huck takes  Money

A Crack in  Dining-room Door

 Undertaker

“He had a Rat!”

“Was you in my Room?”

Jawing

In Trouble

Indignation

How to Find m

He Wrote

Hannah with  Mumps

 Auction

 True Brors

 Doctor leads Huck

 Duke Wrote

“Gentlemen, Gentlemen!”

“Jim Lit Out”

 King shakes Huck

 Duke went for Him

Spanish Moss

“Who Nailed Him?”

Thinking

He gave him Ten Cents

Striking for  Back Country

Still  Sunday-like

She hugged him tight

“Who do you reckon it is?”

“It was Tom Sawyer”

“Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume?”

A pretty long Blessing

Traveling By Rail

Vittles

A Simple Job

Witches

Getting Wood

One of  Best Authorities

 Breakfast-Horn

Smouching  Knives

Going down  Lightning-Rod

Stealing spoons

Tom advises a Witch Pie

 Rubbage-Pile

“Missus, dey’s a Sheet Gone”

In a Tearing Way

One of his Ancestors

Jim’s Coat of Arms

A Tough Job

Buttons on ir Tails

Irrigation

Keeping off Dull Times

Sawdust Diet

Trouble is Brewing

Fishing

Every one had a Gun

Tom caught on a Splinter

Jim advises a Doctor

 Doctor

Uncle Silas in Danger

Old Mrs. Hotchkiss

Aunt Sally talks to Huck

Tom Sawyer wounded

 Doctor speaks for Jim

Tom rose square up in Bed

“H out m Letters”

Out of Bondage

Tom’s Liberality

Yours Truly




EXPLANATORY

IN this book a number of dialects are used, to wit:   Missouri negro
dialect;  extremest form of  backwoods Southwestern dialect; 
ordinary “Pike County” dialect;  four modified varieties of this
last.  shadings have not been done in a haphazard fashion, or by
guesswork; but painstakingly,  with  trustworthy guidance 
support of personal familiarity with se several forms of speech.

I make this explanation for  reason that without it many readers
would suppose that all se characters were trying to talk alike 
not succeeding.

 AUTHOR.




HUCKLEBERRY FINN

Scene:   Mississippi Valley Time:  Forty to fifty years ago




CHAPTER I.

YOU don’t know about me without you have read a book by  name of 
Adventures of Tom Sawyer; but that ain’t no matter.  That book was made
by Mr. Mark Twain,  he told  truth, mainly.  re was things
which he stretched, but mainly he told  truth.  That is nothing.  I
never seen anybody but lied one time or anor, without it was Aunt
Polly, or  widow, or maybe Mary.  Aunt Polly--Tom’s Aunt Polly, she
is-- Mary,   Widow Douglas is all told about in that book, which
is mostly a true book, with some stretchers, as I said before.

Now  way that  book winds up is this:  Tom  me found  money
that  robbers hid in  cave,  it made us rich.  We got six
thous dollars apiece--all gold.  It was an awful sight of money when
it was piled up.  Well, Judge Thatcher he took it  put it out
at interest,  it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all  year
round--more than a body could tell what to do with.   Widow Douglas
she took me for her son,  allowed she would sivilize me; but it was
rough living in  house all  time, considering how dismal regular
 decent  widow was in all her ways;  so when I couldn’t st
it no longer I lit out.  I got into my old rags  my sugar-hogshead
again,  was free  satisfied.  But Tom Sawyer he hunted me up 
said he was going to start a b of robbers,  I might join if I
would go back to  widow  be respectable.  So I went back.

 widow she cried over me,  called me a poor lost lamb,  she
called me a lot of or names, too, but she never meant no harm by
it. She put me in m new clos again,  I couldn’t do nothing but
sweat  sweat,  feel all cramped up.  Well, n,  old thing
commenced again.   widow rung a bell for supper,  you had to come
to time. When you got to  table you couldn’t go right to eating, but
you had to wait for  widow to tuck down her head  grumble a little
over  victuals, though re warn’t really anything  matter with
m,--that is, nothing only everything was cooked by itself.  In a
barrel of odds  ends it is different; things get mixed up,  
juice kind of swaps around,   things go better.

After supper she got out her book  learned me about Moses  
Bulrushers,  I was in a sweat to find out all about him; but by 
by she let it out that Moses had been dead a considerable long time; so
n I didn’t care no more about him, because I don’t take no stock in
dead people.

Pretty soon I wanted to smoke,  asked  widow to let me.  But she
wouldn’t.  She said it was a mean practice  wasn’t clean,  I must
try to not do it any more.  That is just  way with some people.  y
get down on a thing when y don’t know nothing about it.  Here she was
a-boring about Moses, which was no kin to her,  no use to anybody,
being gone, you see, yet finding a power of fault with me for doing a
thing that had some good in it.   she took snuff, too; of course that
was all right, because she done it herself.

Her sister, Miss Watson, a tolerable slim old maid, with goggles on,
had just come to live with her,  took a set at me now with a
spelling-book. She worked me middling hard for about an hour,  n
 widow made her ease up.  I couldn’t stood it much longer.  n for
an hour it was deadly dull,  I was fidgety.  Miss Watson would say,
“Don’t put your feet up re, Huckleberry;”  “Don’t scrunch up
like that, Huckleberry--set up straight;”  pretty soon she would
say, “Don’t gap  stretch like that, Huckleberry--why don’t you try to
behave?”  n she told me all about  bad place,  I said I wished
I was re. She got mad n, but I didn’t mean no harm.  All I wanted
was to go somewheres; all I wanted was a change, I warn’t particular.
 She said it was wicked to say what I said; said she wouldn’t say it for
 whole world; she was going to live so as to go to  good place.
 Well, I couldn’t see no advantage in going where she was going, so I
made up my mind I wouldn’t try for it.  But I never said so, because it
would only make trouble,  wouldn’t do no good.

Now she had got a start,  she went on  told me all about  good
place.  She said all a body would have to do re was to go around all
day long with a harp  sing, forever  ever.  So I didn’t think
much of it. But I never said so.  I asked her if she reckoned Tom Sawyer
would go re,  she said not by a considerable sight.  I was glad
about that, because I wanted him  me to be toger.

Miss Watson she kept pecking at me,  it got tiresome  lonesome.
 By  by y fetched  niggers in  had prayers,  n
everybody was off to bed.  I went up to my room with a piece of cle,
 put it on  table.  n I set down in a chair by  window 
tried to think of something cheerful, but it warn’t no use.  I felt
so lonesome I most wished I was dead.   stars were shining,  
leaves rustled in  woods ever so mournful;  I heard an owl, away
off, who-whooing about somebody that was dead,  a whippowill  a
dog crying about somebody that was going to die;   wind was trying
to whisper something to me,  I couldn’t make out what it was,  so
it made  cold shivers run over me. n away out in  woods I heard
that kind of a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about
something that’s on its mind  can’t make itself understood,  so
can’t rest easy in its grave,  has to go about that way every night
grieving.  I got so down-hearted  scared I did wish I had some
company.  Pretty soon a spider went crawling up my shoulder,  I
flipped it off  it lit in  cle;  before I could budge it
was all shriveled up.  I didn’t need anybody to tell me that that was
an awful bad sign  would fetch me some bad luck, so I was scared
 most shook  clos off of me. I got up  turned around in my
tracks three times  crossed my breast every time;  n I tied
up a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away.  But
I hadn’t no confidence.  You do that when you’ve lost a horseshoe that
you’ve found, instead of nailing it up over  door, but I hadn’t ever
heard anybody say it was any way to keep off bad luck when you’d killed
a spider.

I set down again, a-shaking all over,  got out my pipe for a smoke;
for  house was all as still as death now,  so  widow wouldn’t
know. Well, after a long time I heard  clock away off in  town
go boom--boom--boom--twelve licks;  all still again--stiller than
ever. Pretty soon I heard a twig snap down in  dark amongst 
trees--something was a stirring.  I set still  listened.  Directly I
could just barely hear a “me-yow! me-yow!” down re.  That was good!
 Says I, “me-yow! me-yow!” as soft as I could,  n I put out 
light  scrambled out of  window on to  shed.  n I slipped
down to  ground  crawled in among  trees, , sure enough,
re was Tom Sawyer waiting for me.




CHAPTER II.

WE went tiptoeing along a path amongst  trees back towards  end of
 widow’s garden, stooping down so as  branches wouldn’t scrape our
heads. When we was passing by  kitchen I fell over a root  made
a noise.  We scrouched down  laid still.  Miss Watson’s big nigger,
named Jim, was setting in  kitchen door; we could see him pretty
clear, because re was a light behind him.  He got up  stretched
his neck out about a minute, listening.  n he says:

“Who dah?”

He listened some more; n he come tiptoeing down  stood right
between us; we could a touched him, nearly.  Well, likely it was
minutes  minutes that re warn’t a sound,  we all re so close
toger.  re was a place on my ankle that got to itching, but I
dasn’t scratch it;  n my ear begun to itch;  next my back,
right between my shoulders.  Seemed like I’d die if I couldn’t scratch.
 Well, I’ve noticed that thing plenty times since.  If you are with
 quality, or at a funeral, or trying to go to sleep when you ain’t
sleepy--if you are anywheres where it won’t do for you to scratch, why
you will itch all over in upwards of a thous places. Pretty soon Jim
says:

“Say, who is you?  Whar is you?  Dog my cats ef I didn’ hear sumf’n.
Well, I know what I’s gwyne to do:  I’s gwyne to set down here 
listen tell I hears it agin.”

So he set down on  ground betwixt me  Tom.  He leaned his back up
against a tree,  stretched his legs out till one of m most touched
one of mine.  My nose begun to itch.  It itched till  tears come into
my eyes.  But I dasn’t scratch.  n it begun to itch on  inside.
Next I got to itching underneath.  I didn’t know how I was going to set
still. This miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes; but
it seemed a sight longer than that.  I was itching in eleven different
places now.  I reckoned I couldn’t st it more’n a minute longer,
but I set my teeth hard  got ready to try.  Just n Jim begun
to brea heavy; next he begun to snore-- n I was pretty soon
comfortable again.

Tom he made a sign to me--kind of a little noise with his mouth-- we
went creeping away on our hs  knees.  When we was ten foot off Tom
whispered to me,  wanted to tie Jim to  tree for fun.  But I said
no; he might wake  make a disturbance,  n y’d find out I
warn’t in. n Tom said he hadn’t got cles enough,  he would slip
in  kitchen  get some more.  I didn’t want him to try.  I said Jim
might wake up  come.  But Tom wanted to resk it; so we slid in re
 got three cles,  Tom laid five cents on  table for pay.
n we got out,  I was in a sweat to get away; but nothing would do
Tom but he must crawl to where Jim was, on his hs  knees,  play
something on him.  I waited,  it seemed a good while, everything was
so still  lonesome.

As soon as Tom was back we cut along  path, around  garden fence,
 by  by fetched up on  steep top of  hill  or side of
 house.  Tom said he slipped Jim’s hat off of his head  hung it
on a limb right over him,  Jim stirred a little, but he didn’t wake.
Afterwards Jim said  witches be witched him  put him in a trance,
 rode him all over  State,  n set him under  trees again,
 hung his hat on a limb to show who done it.   next time Jim told
it he said y rode him down to New Orleans; , after that, every
time he told it he spread it more  more, till by  by he said y
rode him all over  world,  tired him most to death,  his back
was all over saddle-boils.  Jim was monstrous proud about it,  he
got so he wouldn’t hardly notice  or niggers.  Niggers would come
miles to hear Jim tell about it,  he was more looked up to than any
nigger in that country.  Strange niggers would st with ir mouths
open  look him all over, same as if he was a wonder.  Niggers is
always talking about witches in  dark by  kitchen fire; but
whenever one was talking  letting on to know all about such things,
Jim would happen in  say, “Hm!  What you know ‘bout witches?” 
that nigger was corked up  had to take a back seat.  Jim always kept
that five-center piece round his neck with a string,  said it was a
charm  devil give to him with his own hs,  told him he could
cure anybody with it  fetch witches whenever he wanted to just by
saying something to it; but he never told what it was he said to it.
 Niggers would come from all around re  give Jim anything y
had, just for a sight of that five-center piece; but y wouldn’t touch
it, because  devil had had his hs on it.  Jim was most ruined for
a servant, because he got stuck up on account of having seen  devil
 been rode by witches.

Well, when Tom  me got to  edge of  hilltop we looked away down
into  village  could see three or four lights twinkling, where
re was sick folks, maybe;   stars over us was sparkling ever
so fine;  down by  village was  river, a whole mile broad, 
awful still  gr.  We went down  hill  found Jo Harper 
Ben Rogers,  two or three more of  boys, hid in  old tanyard.
 So we unhitched a skiff  pulled down  river two mile  a half,
to  big scar on  hillside,  went ashore.

We went to a clump of bushes,  Tom made everybody swear to keep 
secret,  n showed m a hole in  hill, right in  thickest
part of  bushes.  n we lit  cles,  crawled in on our
hs  knees.  We went about two hundred yards,  n  cave
opened up. Tom poked about amongst  passages,  pretty soon ducked
under a wall where you wouldn’t a noticed that re was a hole.  We
went along a narrow place  got into a kind of room, all damp 
sweaty  cold,  re we stopped.  Tom says:

“Now, we’ll start this b of robbers  call it Tom Sawyer’s Gang.
Everybody that wants to join has got to take an oath,  write his name
in blood.”

Everybody was willing.  So Tom got out a sheet of paper that he had
wrote  oath on,  read it.  It swore every boy to stick to 
b,  never tell any of  secrets;  if anybody done anything to
any boy in  b, whichever boy was ordered to kill that person 
his family must do it,  he mustn’t eat  he mustn’t sleep till he
had killed m  hacked a cross in ir breasts, which was  sign
of  b.  nobody that didn’t belong to  b could use that
mark,  if he did he must be sued;  if he done it again he must be
killed.   if anybody that belonged to  b told  secrets, he
must have his throat cut,  n have his carcass burnt up  
ashes scattered all around,  his name blotted off of  list with
blood  never mentioned again by  gang, but have a curse put on it
 be forgot forever.

Everybody said it was a real beautiful oath,  asked Tom if he got
it out of his own head.  He said, some of it, but  rest was out of
pirate-books  robber-books,  every gang that was high-toned had
it.

Some thought it would be good to kill  _families_ of boys that told
 secrets.  Tom said it was a good idea, so he took a pencil  wrote
it in. n Ben Rogers says:

“Here’s Huck Finn, he hain’t got no family; what you going to do ‘bout
him?”

“Well, hain’t he got a far?” says Tom Sawyer.

“Yes, he’s got a far, but you can’t never find him se days.  He
used to lay drunk with  hogs in  tanyard, but he hain’t been seen
in se parts for a year or more.”

y talked it over,  y was going to rule me out, because y
said every boy must have a family or somebody to kill, or else it
wouldn’t be fair  square for  ors.  Well, nobody could think of
anything to do--everybody was stumped,  set still.  I was most ready
to cry; but all at once I thought of a way,  so I offered m Miss
Watson--y could kill her.  Everybody said:

“Oh, she’ll do.  That’s all right.  Huck can come in.”

n y all stuck a pin in ir fingers to get blood to sign with,
 I made my mark on  paper.

“Now,” says Ben Rogers, “what’s  line of business of this Gang?”

“Nothing only robbery  murder,” Tom said.

“But who are we going to rob?--houses, or cattle, or--”

“Stuff! stealing cattle  such things ain’t robbery; it’s burglary,”
 says Tom Sawyer.  “We ain’t burglars.  That ain’t no sort of style.  We
are highwaymen.  We stop stages  carriages on  road, with masks
on,  kill  people  take ir watches  money.”

“Must we always kill  people?”

“Oh, certainly.  It’s best.  Some authorities think different, but
mostly it’s considered best to kill m--except some that you bring to
 cave here,  keep m till y’re ransomed.”

“Ransomed?  What’s that?”

“I don’t know.  But that’s what y do.  I’ve seen it in books;  so
of course that’s what we’ve got to do.”

“But how can we do it if we don’t know what it is?”

“Why, blame it all, we’ve _got_ to do it.  Don’t I tell you it’s in 
books?  Do you want to go to doing different from what’s in  books,
 get things all muddled up?”

“Oh, that’s all very fine to _say_, Tom Sawyer, but how in  nation
are se fellows going to be ransomed if we don’t know how to do it
to m?--that’s  thing I want to get at.  Now, what do you reckon it
is?”

“Well, I don’t know.  But per’aps if we keep m till y’re ransomed,
it means that we keep m till y’re dead.”

“Now, that’s something _like_.  That’ll answer.  Why couldn’t you said
that before?  We’ll keep m till y’re ransomed to death;  a
borsome lot y’ll be, too--eating up everything,  always trying
to get loose.”

“How you talk, Ben Rogers.  How can y get loose when re’s a guard
over m, ready to shoot m down if y move a peg?”

“A guard!  Well, that _is_ good.  So somebody’s got to set up all night
 never get any sleep, just so as to watch m.  I think that’s
foolishness. Why can’t a body take a club  ransom m as soon as
y get here?”

“Because it ain’t in  books so--that’s why.  Now, Ben Rogers, do you
want to do things regular, or don’t you?--that’s  idea.  Don’t you
reckon that  people that made  books knows what’s  correct
thing to do?  Do you reckon _you_ can learn ‘em anything?  Not by a good
deal. No, sir, we’ll just go on  ransom m in  regular way.”

“All right.  I don’t mind; but I say it’s a fool way, anyhow.  Say, do
we kill  women, too?”

“Well, Ben Rogers, if I was as ignorant as you I wouldn’t let on.  Kill
 women?  No; nobody ever saw anything in  books like that.  You
fetch m to  cave,  you’re always as polite as pie to m;
 by  by y fall in love with you,  never want to go home any
more.”

“Well, if that’s  way I’m agreed, but I don’t take no stock in it.
Mighty soon we’ll have  cave so cluttered up with women,  fellows
waiting to be ransomed, that re won’t be no place for  robbers.
But go ahead, I ain’t got nothing to say.”

Little Tommy Barnes was asleep now,  when y waked him up he was
scared,  cried,  said he wanted to go home to his ma,  didn’t
want to be a robber any more.

So y all made fun of him,  called him cry-baby,  that made him
mad,  he said he would go straight  tell all  secrets.  But
Tom give him five cents to keep quiet,  said we would all go home 
meet next week,  rob somebody  kill some people.

Ben Rogers said he couldn’t get out much, only Sundays,  so he wanted
to begin next Sunday; but all  boys said it would be wicked to do it
on Sunday,  that settled  thing.  y agreed to get toger 
fix a day as soon as y could,  n we elected Tom Sawyer first
captain  Jo Harper second captain of  Gang,  so started home.

I clumb up  shed  crept into my window just before day was
breaking. My new clos was all greased up  clayey,  I was
dog-tired.




CHAPTER III.

WELL, I got a good going-over in  morning from old Miss Watson on
account of my clos; but  widow she didn’t scold, but only cleaned
off  grease  clay,  looked so sorry that I thought I would
behave awhile if I could.  n Miss Watson she took me in  closet
 prayed, but nothing come of it.  She told me to pray every day, 
whatever I asked for I would get it.  But it warn’t so.  I tried it.
Once I got a fish-line, but no hooks.  It warn’t any good to me without
hooks.  I tried for  hooks three or four times, but somehow I
couldn’t make it work.  By  by, one day, I asked Miss Watson to
try for me, but she said I was a fool.  She never told me why,  I
couldn’t make it out no way.

I set down one time back in  woods,  had a long think about it.
 I says to myself, if a body can get anything y pray for, why don’t
Deacon Winn get back  money he lost on pork?  Why can’t  widow get
back her silver snuffbox that was stole?  Why can’t Miss Watson fat up?
No, says I to my self, re ain’t nothing in it.  I went  told 
widow about it,  she said  thing a body could get by praying for
it was “spiritual gifts.”  This was too many for me, but she told me
what she meant--I must help or people,  do everything I could for
or people,  look out for m all  time,  never think about
myself. This was including Miss Watson, as I took it.  I went out in 
woods  turned it over in my mind a long time, but I couldn’t see no
advantage about it--except for  or people; so at last I reckoned
I wouldn’t worry about it any more, but just let it go.  Sometimes 
widow would take me one side  talk about Providence in a way to make
a body’s mouth water; but maybe next day Miss Watson would take hold
 knock it all down again.  I judged I could see that re was two
Providences,  a poor chap would st considerable show with 
widow’s Providence, but if Miss Watson’s got him re warn’t no help
for him any more.  I thought it all out,  reckoned I would belong
to  widow’s if he wanted me, though I couldn’t make out how he was
a-going to be any better off n than what he was before, seeing I was
so ignorant,  so kind of low-down  ornery.

Pap he hadn’t been seen for more than a year,  that was comfortable
for me; I didn’t want to see him no more.  He used to always whale me
when he was sober  could get his hs on me; though I used to take
to  woods most of  time when he was around.  Well, about this time
he was found in  river drownded, about twelve mile above town, so
people said.  y judged it was him, anyway; said this drownded man was
just his size,  was ragged,  had uncommon long hair, which was all
like pap; but y couldn’t make nothing out of  face, because it had
been in  water so long it warn’t much like a face at all.  y said
he was floating on his back in  water.  y took him  buried him
on  bank.  But I warn’t comfortable long, because I happened to think
of something.  I knowed mighty well that a drownded man don’t float on
his back, but on his face.  So I knowed, n, that this warn’t pap, but
a woman dressed up in a man’s clos.  So I was uncomfortable again.
 I judged  old man would turn up again by  by, though I wished he
wouldn’t.

We played robber now  n about a month,  n I resigned.  All
 boys did.  We hadn’t robbed nobody, hadn’t killed any people, but
only just pretended.  We used to hop out of  woods  go charging
down on hog-drivers  women in carts taking garden stuff to market,
but we never hived any of m.  Tom Sawyer called  hogs “ingots,”
  he called  turnips  stuff “julery,”  we would go to 
cave  powwow over what we had done,  how many people we had killed
 marked.  But I couldn’t see no profit in it.  One time Tom sent a
boy to run about town with a blazing stick, which he called a slogan
(which was  sign for  Gang to get toger),  n he said he
had got secret news by his spies that next day a whole parcel of Spanish
merchants  rich A-rabs was going to camp in Cave Hollow with two
hundred elephants,  six hundred camels,  over a thous “sumter”
 mules, all loaded down with di’monds,  y didn’t have only a guard
of four hundred soldiers,  so we would lay in ambuscade, as he called
it,  kill  lot  scoop  things.  He said we must slick up
our swords  guns,  get ready.  He never could go after even a
turnip-cart but he must have  swords  guns all scoured up for it,
though y was only lath  broomsticks,  you might scour at m
till you rotted,  n y warn’t worth a mouthful of ashes more
than what y was before.  I didn’t believe we could lick such a crowd
of Spaniards  A-rabs, but I wanted to see  camels  elephants,
so I was on h next day, Saturday, in  ambuscade;  when we got
 word we rushed out of  woods  down  hill.  But re warn’t
no Spaniards  A-rabs,  re warn’t no camels nor no elephants.
 It warn’t anything but a Sunday-school picnic,  only a primer-class
at that.  We busted it up,  chased  children up  hollow; but we
never got anything but some doughnuts  jam, though Ben Rogers got
a rag doll,  Jo Harper got a hymn-book  a tract;  n 
teacher charged in,  made us drop everything  cut.

 I didn’t see no di’monds,  I told Tom Sawyer so.  He said re was
loads of m re, anyway;  he said re was A-rabs re, too,
 elephants  things.  I said, why couldn’t we see m, n?  He
said if I warn’t so ignorant, but had read a book called Don Quixote, I
would know without asking.  He said it was all done by enchantment.  He
said re was hundreds of soldiers re,  elephants  treasure,
 so on, but we had enemies which he called magicians;  y had
turned  whole thing into an infant Sunday-school, just out of spite.
 I said, all right; n  thing for us to do was to go for 
magicians.  Tom Sawyer said I was a numskull.

“Why,” said he, “a magician could call up a lot of genies,  y
would hash you up like nothing before you could say Jack Robinson.  y
are as tall as a tree  as big around as a church.”

“Well,” I says, “s’pose we got some genies to help _us_--can’t we lick
 or crowd n?”

“How you going to get m?”

“I don’t know.  How do _y_ get m?”

“Why, y rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring,  n  genies
come tearing in, with  thunder  lightning a-ripping around  
smoke a-rolling,  everything y’re told to do y up  do it.
 y don’t think nothing of pulling a shot-tower up by  roots, 
belting a Sunday-school superintendent over  head with it--or any
or man.”

“Who makes m tear around so?”

“Why, whoever rubs  lamp or  ring.  y belong to whoever rubs
 lamp or  ring,  y’ve got to do whatever he says.  If he
tells m to build a palace forty miles long out of di’monds,  fill
it full of chewing-gum, or whatever you want,  fetch an emperor’s
daughter from China for you to marry, y’ve got to do it-- y’ve
got to do it before sun-up next morning, too.   more:  y’ve got
to waltz that palace around over  country wherever you want it, you
underst.”

“Well,” says I, “I think y are a pack of flat-heads for not keeping
 palace mselves ‘stead of fooling m away like that.   what’s
more--if I was one of m I would see a man in Jericho before I would
drop my business  come to him for  rubbing of an old tin lamp.”

“How you talk, Huck Finn.  Why, you’d _have_ to come when he rubbed it,
wher you wanted to or not.”

“What!  I as high as a tree  as big as a church?  All right, n;
I _would_ come; but I lay I’d make that man climb  highest tree re
was in  country.”

“Shucks, it ain’t no use to talk to you, Huck Finn.  You don’t seem to
know anything, somehow--perfect saphead.”

I thought all this over for two or three days,  n I reckoned I
would see if re was anything in it.  I got an old tin lamp  an
iron ring,  went out in  woods  rubbed  rubbed till I sweat
like an Injun, calculating to build a palace  sell it; but it warn’t
no use, none of  genies come.  So n I judged that all that stuff
was only just one of Tom Sawyer’s lies.  I reckoned he believed in 
A-rabs   elephants, but as for me I think different.  It had all
 marks of a Sunday-school.




CHAPTER IV.

WELL, three or four months run along,  it was well into  winter
now. I had been to school most all  time  could spell  read 
write just a little,  could say  multiplication table up to six
times seven is thirty-five,  I don’t reckon I could ever get any
furr than that if I was to live forever.  I don’t take no stock in
mamatics, anyway.

At first I hated  school, but by  by I got so I could st it.
Whenever I got uncommon tired I played hookey,   hiding I got next
day done me good  cheered me up.  So  longer I went to school 
easier it got to be.  I was getting sort of used to  widow’s ways,
too,  y warn’t so raspy on me.  Living in a house  sleeping in
a bed pulled on me pretty tight mostly, but before  cold wear I
used to slide out  sleep in  woods sometimes,  so that was a
rest to me.  I liked  old ways best, but I was getting so I liked 
new ones, too, a little bit.  widow said I was coming along slow but
sure,  doing very satisfactory.  She said she warn’t ashamed of me.

One morning I happened to turn over  salt-cellar at breakfast.
 I reached for some of it as quick as I could to throw over my left
shoulder  keep off  bad luck, but Miss Watson was in ahead of me,
 crossed me off. She says, “Take your hs away, Huckleberry; what
a mess you are always making!”   widow put in a good word for me, but
that warn’t going to keep off  bad luck, I knowed that well enough.
 I started out, after breakfast, feeling worried  shaky, 
wondering where it was going to fall on me,  what it was going to be.
 re is ways to keep off some kinds of bad luck, but this wasn’t one
of m kind; so I never tried to do anything, but just poked along
low-spirited  on  watch-out.

I went down to  front garden  clumb over  stile where you go
through  high board fence.  re was an inch of new snow on 
ground,  I seen somebody’s tracks.  y had come up from  quarry
 stood around  stile a while,  n went on around  garden
fence.  It was funny y hadn’t come in, after sting around so.  I
couldn’t make it out.  It was very curious, somehow.  I was going to
follow around, but I stooped down to look at  tracks first.  I didn’t
notice anything at first, but next I did.  re was a cross in  left
boot-heel made with big nails, to keep off  devil.

I was up in a second  shinning down  hill.  I looked over my
shoulder every now  n, but I didn’t see nobody.  I was at Judge
Thatcher’s as quick as I could get re.  He said:

“Why, my boy, you are all out of breath.  Did you come for your
interest?”

“No, sir,” I says; “is re some for me?”

“Oh, yes, a half-yearly is in last night--over a hundred  fifty
dollars.  Quite a fortune for you.  You had better let me invest it
along with your six thous, because if you take it you’ll spend it.”

“No, sir,” I says, “I don’t want to spend it.  I don’t want it at
all--nor  six thous, nur.  I want you to take it; I want to give
it to you-- six thous  all.”

He looked surprised.  He couldn’t seem to make it out.  He says:

“Why, what can you mean, my boy?”

I says, “Don’t you ask me no questions about it, please.  You’ll take
it--won’t you?”

He says:

“Well, I’m puzzled.  Is something  matter?”

“Please take it,” says I, “ don’t ask me nothing--n I won’t have to
tell no lies.”

He studied a while,  n he says:

“Oho-o!  I think I see.  You want to _sell_ all your property to me--not
give it.  That’s  correct idea.”

n he wrote something on a paper  read it over,  says:

“re; you see it says ‘for a consideration.’  That means I have bought
it of you  paid you for it.  Here’s a dollar for you.  Now you sign
it.”

So I signed it,  left.

Miss Watson’s nigger, Jim, had a hair-ball as big as your fist, which
had been took out of  fourth stomach of an ox,  he used to do
magic with it.  He said re was a spirit inside of it,  it knowed
everything.  So I went to him that night  told him pap was here
again, for I found his tracks in  snow.  What I wanted to know was,
what he was going to do,  was he going to stay?  Jim got out his
hair-ball  said something over it,  n he held it up  dropped
it on  floor.  It fell pretty solid,  only rolled about an inch.
 Jim tried it again,  n anor time,  it acted just  same.
 Jim got down on his knees,  put his ear against it  listened.
 But it warn’t no use; he said it wouldn’t talk. He said sometimes it
wouldn’t talk without money.  I told him I had an old slick counterfeit
quarter that warn’t no good because  brass showed through  silver
a little,  it wouldn’t pass nohow, even if  brass didn’t show,
because it was so slick it felt greasy,  so that would tell on it
every time.  (I reckoned I wouldn’t say nothing about  dollar I got
from  judge.) I said it was pretty bad money, but maybe  hair-ball
would take it, because maybe it wouldn’t know  difference.  Jim smelt
it  bit it  rubbed it,  said he would manage so  hair-ball
would think it was good.  He said he would split open a raw Irish potato
 stick  quarter in between  keep it re all night,  next
morning you couldn’t see no brass,  it wouldn’t feel greasy no more,
 so anybody in town would take it in a minute, let alone a hair-ball.
 Well, I knowed a potato would do that before, but I had forgot it.

Jim put  quarter under  hair-ball,  got down  listened
again. This time he said  hair-ball was all right.  He said it
would tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to.  I says, go on.  So 
hair-ball talked to Jim,  Jim told it to me.  He says:

“Yo’ ole far doan’ know yit what he’s a-gwyne to do.  Sometimes he
spec he’ll go ‘way, en den agin he spec he’ll stay.  De bes’ way is to
res’ easy en let de ole man take his own way.  Dey’s two angels hoverin’
roun’ ‘bout him.  One uv ‘em is white en shiny, en t’or one is black.
De white one gits him to go right a little while, den de black one sail
in en bust it all up.  A body can’t tell yit which one gwyne to fetch
him at de las’.  But you is all right.  You gwyne to have considable
trouble in yo’ life, en considable joy.  Sometimes you gwyne to git
hurt, en sometimes you gwyne to git sick; but every time you’s gwyne
to git well agin.  Dey’s two gals flyin’ ‘bout you in yo’ life.  One
uv ‘em’s light en t’or one is dark. One is rich en t’or is po’.
 You’s gwyne to marry de po’ one fust en de rich one by en by.  You
wants to keep ‘way fum de water as much as you kin, en don’t run no
resk, ‘kase it’s down in de bills dat you’s gwyne to git hung.”

When I lit my cle  went up to my room that night re sat pap his
own self!




CHAPTER V.

I had shut  door to.  n I turned around  re he was.  I used
to be scared of him all  time, he tanned me so much.  I reckoned I
was scared now, too; but in a minute I see I was mistaken--that is, after
 first jolt, as you may say, when my breath sort of hitched, he being
so unexpected; but right away after I see I warn’t scared of him worth
bothring about.

He was most fifty,  he looked it.  His hair was long  tangled 
greasy,  hung down,  you could see his eyes shining through
like he was behind vines.  It was all black, no gray; so was his long,
mixed-up whiskers.  re warn’t no color in his face, where his face
showed; it was white; not like anor man’s white, but a white to make
a body sick, a white to make a body’s flesh crawl--a tree-toad white, a
fish-belly white.  As for his clos--just rags, that was all.  He had
one ankle resting on t’or knee;  boot on that foot was busted, 
two of his toes stuck through,  he worked m now  n.  His hat
was laying on  floor--an old black slouch with  top caved in, like
a lid.

I stood a-looking at him; he set re a-looking at me, with his chair
tilted back a little.  I set  cle down.  I noticed  window was
up; so he had clumb in by  shed.  He kept a-looking me all over.  By
 by he says:

“Starchy clos--very.  You think you’re a good deal of a big-bug,
_don’t_ you?”

“Maybe I am, maybe I ain’t,” I says.

“Don’t you give me none o’ your lip,” says he.  “You’ve put on
considerable many frills since I been away.  I’ll take you down a peg
before I get done with you.  You’re educated, too, y say--can read 
write.  You think you’re better’n your far, now, don’t you, because
he can’t?  _I’ll_ take it out of you.  Who told you you might meddle
with such hifalut’n foolishness, hey?--who told you you could?”

“ widow.  She told me.”

“ widow, hey?-- who told  widow she could put in her shovel
about a thing that ain’t none of her business?”

“Nobody never told her.”

“Well, I’ll learn her how to meddle.   looky here--you drop that
school, you hear?  I’ll learn people to bring up a boy to put on airs
over his own far  let on to be better’n what _he_ is.  You lemme
catch you fooling around that school again, you hear?  Your mor
couldn’t read,  she couldn’t write, nur, before she died.  None
of  family couldn’t before _y_ died.  I can’t;  here you’re
a-swelling yourself up like this.  I ain’t  man to st it--you hear?
Say, lemme hear you read.”

I took up a book  begun something about General Washington  
wars. When I’d read about a half a minute, he fetched  book a whack
with his h  knocked it across  house.  He says:

“It’s so.  You can do it.  I had my doubts when you told me.  Now looky
here; you stop that putting on frills.  I won’t have it.  I’ll lay for
you, my smarty;  if I catch you about that school I’ll tan you good.
First you know you’ll get religion, too.  I never see such a son.”

He took up a little blue  yaller picture of some cows  a boy, 
says:

“What’s this?”

“It’s something y give me for learning my lessons good.”

He tore it up,  says:

“I’ll give you something better--I’ll give you a cowhide.”

He set re a-mumbling  a-growling a minute,  n he says:

“_Ain’t_ you a sweet-scented dy, though?  A bed;  bedclos; 
a look’n’-glass;  a piece of carpet on  floor-- your own far
got to sleep with  hogs in  tanyard.  I never see such a son.  I
bet I’ll take some o’ se frills out o’ you before I’m done with you.
Why, re ain’t no end to your airs--y say you’re rich.  Hey?--how’s
that?”

“y lie--that’s how.”

“Looky here--mind how you talk to me; I’m a-sting about all I can
st now--so don’t gimme no sass.  I’ve been in town two days,  I
hain’t heard nothing but about you bein’ rich.  I heard about it
away down  river, too.  That’s why I come.  You git me that money
to-morrow--I want it.”

“I hain’t got no money.”

“It’s a lie.  Judge Thatcher’s got it.  You git it.  I want it.”

“I hain’t got no money, I tell you.  You ask Judge Thatcher; he’ll tell
you  same.”

“All right.  I’ll ask him;  I’ll make him pungle, too, or I’ll know
 reason why.  Say, how much you got in your pocket?  I want it.”

“I hain’t got only a dollar,  I want that to--”

“It don’t make no difference what you want it for--you just shell it
out.”

He took it  bit it to see if it was good,  n he said he was
going down town to get some whisky; said he hadn’t had a drink all day.
When he had got out on  shed he put his head in again,  cussed
me for putting on frills  trying to be better than him;  when I
reckoned he was gone he come back  put his head in again,  told me
to mind about that school, because he was going to lay for me  lick
me if I didn’t drop that.

Next day he was drunk,  he went to Judge Thatcher’s  bullyragged
him,  tried to make him give up  money; but he couldn’t,  n
he swore he’d make  law force him.

 judge   widow went to law to get  court to take me away
from him  let one of m be my guardian; but it was a new judge that
had just come,  he didn’t know  old man; so he said courts mustn’t
interfere  separate families if y could help it; said he’d drur
not take a child away from its far.  So Judge Thatcher   widow
had to quit on  business.

That pleased  old man till he couldn’t rest.  He said he’d cowhide
me till I was black  blue if I didn’t raise some money for him.  I
borrowed three dollars from Judge Thatcher,  pap took it  got
drunk,  went a-blowing around  cussing  whooping  carrying
on;  he kept it up all over town, with a tin pan, till most midnight;
n y jailed him,  next day y had him before court,  jailed
him again for a week.  But he said _he_ was satisfied; said he was boss
of his son,  he’d make it warm for _him_.

When he got out  new judge said he was a-going to make a man of him.
So he took him to his own house,  dressed him up clean  nice, 
had him to breakfast  dinner  supper with  family,  was just
old pie to him, so to speak.   after supper he talked to him about
temperance  such things till  old man cried,  said he’d been
a fool,  fooled away his life; but now he was a-going to turn over
a new leaf  be a man nobody wouldn’t be ashamed of,  he hoped 
judge would help him  not look down on him.   judge said he could
hug him for m words; so he cried,  his wife she cried again; pap
said he’d been a man that had always been misunderstood before,  
judge said he believed it.   old man said that what a man wanted
that was down was sympathy,   judge said it was so; so y cried
again.   when it was bedtime  old man rose up  held out his
h,  says:

“Look at it, gentlemen  ladies all; take a-hold of it; shake it.
re’s a h that was  h of a hog; but it ain’t so no more; it’s
 h of a man that’s started in on a new life, ’ll die before
he’ll go back.  You mark m words--don’t forget I said m.  It’s a
clean h now; shake it--don’t be afeard.”

So y shook it, one after  or, all around,  cried.  
judge’s wife she kissed it.  n  old man he signed a pledge--made
his mark.  judge said it was  holiest time on record, or something
like that. n y tucked  old man into a beautiful room, which was
 spare room,  in  night some time he got powerful thirsty 
clumb out on to  porch-roof  slid down a stanchion  traded his
new coat for a jug of forty-rod,  clumb back again  had a good old
time;  towards daylight he crawled out again, drunk as a fiddler, 
rolled off  porch  broke his left arm in two places,  was most
froze to death when somebody found him after sun-up.   when y come
to look at that spare room y had to take soundings before y could
navigate it.

 judge he felt kind of sore.  He said he reckoned a body could reform
 old man with a shotgun, maybe, but he didn’t know no or way.




CHAPTER VI.

WELL, pretty soon  old man was up  around again,  n he went
for Judge Thatcher in  courts to make him give up that money,  he
went for me, too, for not stopping school.  He catched me a couple of
times  thrashed me, but I went to school just  same,  dodged
him or outrun him most of  time.  I didn’t want to go to school much
before, but I reckoned I’d go now to spite pap.  That law trial was a
slow business--appeared like y warn’t ever going to get started on it;
so every now  n I’d borrow two or three dollars off of  judge
for him, to keep from getting a cowhiding.  Every time he got money he
got drunk;  every time he got drunk he raised Cain around town; 
every time he raised Cain he got jailed.  He was just suited--this kind
of thing was right in his line.

He got to hanging around  widow’s too much  so she told him at
last that if he didn’t quit using around re she would make trouble
for him. Well, _wasn’t_ he mad?  He said he would show who was Huck
Finn’s boss.  So he watched out for me one day in  spring, 
catched me,  took me up  river about three mile in a skiff, 
crossed over to  Illinois shore where it was woody  re warn’t
no houses but an old log hut in a place where  timber was so thick
you couldn’t find it if you didn’t know where it was.

He kept me with him all  time,  I never got a chance to run off.
We lived in that old cabin,  he always locked  door  put 
key under his head nights.  He had a gun which he had stole, I reckon,
 we fished  hunted,  that was what we lived on.  Every little
while he locked me in  went down to  store, three miles, to 
ferry,  traded fish  game for whisky,  fetched it home  got
drunk  had a good time,  licked me.   widow she found out where
I was by  by,  she sent a man over to try to get hold of me; but
pap drove him off with  gun,  it warn’t long after that till I was
used to being where I was,  liked it--all but  cowhide part.

It was kind of lazy  jolly, laying off comfortable all day, smoking
 fishing,  no books nor study.  Two months or more run along, 
my clos got to be all rags  dirt,  I didn’t see how I’d ever
got to like it so well at  widow’s, where you had to wash,  eat on
a plate,  comb up,  go to bed  get up regular,  be forever
boring over a book,  have old Miss Watson pecking at you all 
time.  I didn’t want to go back no more.  I had stopped cussing, because
 widow didn’t like it; but now I took to it again because pap hadn’t
no objections.  It was pretty good times up in  woods re, take it
all around.

But by  by pap got too hy with his hick’ry,  I couldn’t st
it. I was all over welts.  He got to going away so much, too, 
locking me in.  Once he locked me in  was gone three days.  It was
dreadful lonesome.  I judged he had got drownded,  I wasn’t ever
going to get out any more.  I was scared.  I made up my mind I would fix
up some way to leave re.  I had tried to get out of that cabin many
a time, but I couldn’t find no way.  re warn’t a window to it big
enough for a dog to get through.  I couldn’t get up  chimbly; it
was too narrow.   door was thick, solid oak slabs.  Pap was pretty
careful not to leave a knife or anything in  cabin when he was away;
I reckon I had hunted  place over as much as a hundred times; well, I
was most all  time at it, because it was about  only way to put in
 time.  But this time I found something at last; I found an old rusty
wood-saw without any hle; it was laid in between a rafter  
clapboards of  roof. I greased it up  went to work.  re was an
old horse-blanket nailed against  logs at  far end of  cabin
behind  table, to keep  wind from blowing through  chinks 
putting  cle out.  I got under  table  raised  blanket,
 went to work to saw a section of  big bottom log out--big enough
to let me through.  Well, it was a good long job, but I was getting
towards  end of it when I heard pap’s gun in  woods.  I got rid of
 signs of my work,  dropped  blanket  hid my saw,  pretty
soon pap come in.

Pap warn’t in a good humor--so he was his natural self.  He said he was
down town,  everything was going wrong.  His lawyer said he reckoned
he would win his lawsuit  get  money if y ever got started on
 trial; but n re was ways to put it off a long time,  Judge
Thatcher knowed how to do it.  he said people allowed re’d be
anor trial to get me away from him  give me to  widow for my
guardian,  y guessed it would win this time.  This shook me up
considerable, because I didn’t want to go back to  widow’s any more
 be so cramped up  sivilized, as y called it.  n  old man
got to cussing,  cussed everything  everybody he could think of,
 n cussed m all over again to make sure he hadn’t skipped any,
 after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss all round,
including a considerable parcel of people which he didn’t know  names
of,  so called m what’s-his-name when he got to m,  went
right along with his cussing.

He said he would like to see  widow get me.  He said he would watch
out,  if y tried to come any such game on him he knowed of a place
six or seven mile off to stow me in, where y might hunt till y
dropped  y couldn’t find me.  That made me pretty uneasy again,
but only for a minute; I reckoned I wouldn’t stay on h till he got
that chance.

 old man made me go to  skiff  fetch  things he had
got. re was a fifty-pound sack of corn meal,  a side of bacon,
ammunition,  a four-gallon jug of whisky,  an old book  two
newspapers for wadding, besides some tow.  I toted up a load,  went
back  set down on  bow of  skiff to rest.  I thought it all
over,  I reckoned I would walk off with  gun  some lines, 
take to  woods when I run away.  I guessed I wouldn’t stay in one
place, but just tramp right across  country, mostly night times, 
hunt  fish to keep alive,  so get so far away that  old man nor
 widow couldn’t ever find me any more.  I judged I would saw out 
leave that night if pap got drunk enough,  I reckoned he would.  I
got so full of it I didn’t notice how long I was staying till  old
man hollered  asked me wher I was asleep or drownded.

I got  things all up to  cabin,  n it was about dark.  While
I was cooking supper  old man took a swig or two  got sort of
warmed up,  went to ripping again.  He had been drunk over in town,
 laid in  gutter all night,  he was a sight to look at.  A body
would a thought he was Adam--he was just all mud.  Whenever his liquor
begun to work he most always went for  govment, this time he says:

“Call this a govment! why, just look at it  see what it’s like.
Here’s  law a-sting ready to take a man’s son away from him--a
man’s own son, which he has had all  trouble  all  anxiety
 all  expense of raising.  Yes, just as that man has got that
son raised at last,  ready to go to work  begin to do suthin’ for
_him_  give him a rest,  law up  goes for him.   y call
_that_ govment!  That ain’t all, nur.   law backs that old Judge
Thatcher up  helps him to keep me out o’ my property.  Here’s what
 law does:   law takes a man worth six thous dollars 
up’ards,  jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this,  lets
him go round in clos that ain’t fitten for a hog. y call that
govment!  A man can’t get his rights in a govment like this. Sometimes
I’ve a mighty notion to just leave  country for good  all. Yes,
 I _told_ ‘em so; I told old Thatcher so to his face.  Lots of ‘em
heard me,  can tell what I said.  Says I, for two cents I’d leave 
blamed country  never come a-near it agin.  m’s  very words.  I
says look at my hat--if you call it a hat--but  lid raises up  
rest of it goes down till it’s below my chin,  n it ain’t rightly
a hat at all, but more like my head was shoved up through a jint o’
stove-pipe.  Look at it, says I--such a hat for me to wear--one of 
wealthiest men in this town if I could git my rights.

“Oh, yes, this is a wonderful govment, wonderful.  Why, looky here.
re was a free nigger re from Ohio--a mulatter, most as white as
a white man.  He had  whitest shirt on you ever see, too,  
shiniest hat;  re ain’t a man in that town that’s got as fine
clos as what he had;  he had a gold watch  chain,  a
silver-headed cane-- awfulest old gray-headed nabob in  State.  
what do you think?  y said he was a p’fessor in a college,  could
talk all kinds of languages,  knowed everything.   that ain’t 
wust. y said he could _vote_ when he was at home.  Well, that let me
out. Thinks I, what is  country a-coming to?  It was ‘lection day,
 I was just about to go  vote myself if I warn’t too drunk to get
re; but when y told me re was a State in this country where
y’d let that nigger vote, I drawed out.  I says I’ll never vote agin.
 m’s  very words I said; y all heard me;   country may
rot for all me--I’ll never vote agin as long as I live.   to see 
cool way of that nigger--why, he wouldn’t a give me  road if I hadn’t
shoved him out o’  way.  I says to  people, why ain’t this nigger
put up at auction  sold?--that’s what I want to know.   what do you
reckon y said? Why, y said he couldn’t be sold till he’d been in
 State six months,  he hadn’t been re that long yet.  re,
now--that’s a specimen.  y call that a govment that can’t sell a free
nigger till he’s been in  State six months.  Here’s a govment that
calls itself a govment,  lets on to be a govment,  thinks it is a
govment,  yet’s got to set stock-still for six whole months before
it can take a hold of a prowling, thieving, infernal, white-shirted free
nigger, --”

Pap was agoing on so he never noticed where his old limber legs was
taking him to, so he went head over heels over  tub of salt pork 
barked both shins,   rest of his speech was all  hottest kind
of language--mostly hove at  nigger   govment, though he give
 tub some, too, all along, here  re.  He hopped around 
cabin considerable, first on one leg  n on  or, holding
first one shin  n  or one,  at last he let out with his
left foot all of a sudden  fetched  tub a rattling kick.  But it
warn’t good judgment, because that was  boot that had a couple of his
toes leaking out of  front end of it; so now he raised a howl that
fairly made a body’s hair raise,  down he went in  dirt, 
rolled re,  held his toes;   cussing he done n laid over
anything he had ever done previous.  He said so his own self afterwards.
 He had heard old Sowberry Hagan in his best days,  he said it laid
over him, too; but I reckon that was sort of piling it on, maybe.

After supper pap took  jug,  said he had enough whisky re
for two drunks  one delirium tremens.  That was always his word.  I
judged he would be blind drunk in about an hour,  n I would steal
 key, or saw myself out, one or t’or.  He drank  drank, 
tumbled down on his blankets by  by; but luck didn’t run my way.
 He didn’t go sound asleep, but was uneasy.  He groaned  moaned 
thrashed around this way  that for a long time.  At last I got so
sleepy I couldn’t keep my eyes open all I could do,  so before I
knowed what I was about I was sound asleep,   cle burning.

I don’t know how long I was asleep, but all of a sudden re was an
awful scream  I was up.  re was pap looking wild,  skipping
around every which way  yelling about snakes.  He said y was
crawling up his legs;  n he would give a jump  scream,  say
one had bit him on  cheek--but I couldn’t see no snakes.  He started
 run round  round  cabin, hollering “Take him off! take him
off! he’s biting me on  neck!”  I never see a man look so wild in 
eyes. Pretty soon he was all fagged out,  fell down panting; n he
rolled over  over wonderful fast, kicking things every which way,
 striking  grabbing at  air with his hs,  screaming 
saying re was devils a-hold of him.  He wore out by  by,  laid
still a while, moaning.  n he laid stiller,  didn’t make a sound.
 I could hear  owls   wolves away off in  woods,  it
seemed terrible still.  He was laying over by  corner. By  by he
raised up part way  listened, with his head to one side.  He says,
very low:

“Tramp--tramp--tramp; that’s  dead; tramp--tramp--tramp; y’re coming
after me; but I won’t go.  Oh, y’re here! don’t touch me--don’t! hs
off--y’re cold; let go.  Oh, let a poor devil alone!”

n he went down on all fours  crawled off, begging m to let him
alone,  he rolled himself up in his blanket  wallowed in under 
old pine table, still a-begging;  n he went to crying.  I could
hear him through  blanket.

By  by he rolled out  jumped up on his feet looking wild,  he
see me  went for me.  He chased me round  round  place with a
clasp-knife, calling me  Angel of Death,  saying he would kill me,
 n I couldn’t come for him no more.  I begged,  told him I
was only Huck; but he laughed _such_ a screechy laugh,  roared 
cussed,  kept on chasing me up.  Once when I turned short 
dodged under his arm he made a grab  got me by  jacket between my
shoulders,  I thought I was gone; but I slid out of  jacket quick
as lightning,  saved myself. Pretty soon he was all tired out, 
dropped down with his back against  door,  said he would rest a
minute  n kill me. He put his knife under him,  said he would
sleep  get strong,  n he would see who was who.

So he dozed off pretty soon.  By  by I got  old split-bottom chair
 clumb up as easy as I could, not to make any noise,  got down 
gun.  I slipped  ramrod down it to make sure it was loaded, n I
laid it across  turnip barrel, pointing towards pap,  set down
behind it to wait for him to stir.   how slow  still  time did
drag along.




CHAPTER VII.

“GIT up!  What you ‘bout?”

I opened my eyes  looked around, trying to make out where I was.  It
was after sun-up,  I had been sound asleep.  Pap was sting over me
looking sour  sick, too.  He says:

“What you doin’ with this gun?”

I judged he didn’t know nothing about what he had been doing, so I says:

“Somebody tried to get in, so I was laying for him.”

“Why didn’t you roust me out?”

“Well, I tried to, but I couldn’t; I couldn’t budge you.”

“Well, all right.  Don’t st re palavering all day, but out with
you  see if re’s a fish on  lines for breakfast.  I’ll be along
in a minute.”

He unlocked  door,  I cleared out up  river-bank.  I noticed
some pieces of limbs  such things floating down,  a sprinkling of
bark; so I knowed  river had begun to rise.  I reckoned I would have
great times now if I was over at  town.   June rise used to be
always luck for me; because as soon as that rise begins here comes
cordwood floating down,  pieces of log rafts--sometimes a dozen logs
toger; so all you have to do is to catch m  sell m to 
wood-yards   sawmill.

I went along up  bank with one eye out for pap  t’or one out
for what  rise might fetch along.  Well, all at once here comes a
canoe; just a beauty, too, about thirteen or fourteen foot long, riding
high like a duck.  I shot head-first off of  bank like a frog,
clos  all on,  struck out for  canoe.  I just expected
re’d be somebody laying down in it, because people often done that
to fool folks,  when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it y’d
raise up  laugh at him.  But it warn’t so this time.  It was a
drift-canoe sure enough,  I clumb in  paddled her ashore.  Thinks
I,  old man will be glad when he sees this--she’s worth ten dollars.
 But when I got to shore pap wasn’t in sight yet,  as I was running
her into a little creek like a gully, all hung over with vines 
willows, I struck anor idea:  I judged I’d hide her good,  n,
‘stead of taking to  woods when I run off, I’d go down  river
about fifty mile  camp in one place for good,  not have such a
rough time tramping on foot.

It was pretty close to  shanty,  I thought I heard  old man
coming all  time; but I got her hid;  n I out  looked around
a bunch of willows,  re was  old man down  path a piece just
drawing a bead on a bird with his gun.  So he hadn’t seen anything.

When he got along I was hard at it taking up a “trot” line.  He abused
me a little for being so slow; but I told him I fell in  river, 
that was what made me so long.  I knowed he would see I was wet, 
n he would be asking questions.  We got five catfish off  lines
 went home.

While we laid off after breakfast to sleep up, both of us being about
wore out, I got to thinking that if I could fix up some way to keep pap
  widow from trying to follow me, it would be a certainer thing
than trusting to luck to get far enough off before y missed me; you
see, all kinds of things might happen.  Well, I didn’t see no way for a
while, but by  by pap raised up a minute to drink anor barrel of
water,  he says:

“Anor time a man comes a-prowling round here you roust me out, you
hear? That man warn’t here for no good.  I’d a shot him.  Next time you
roust me out, you hear?”

n he dropped down  went to sleep again; but what he had been
saying give me  very idea I wanted.  I says to myself, I can fix it
now so nobody won’t think of following me.

About twelve o’clock we turned out  went along up  bank.  
river was coming up pretty fast,  lots of driftwood going by on 
rise. By  by along comes part of a log raft--nine logs fast toger.
 We went out with  skiff  towed it ashore.  n we had dinner.
Anybody but pap would a waited  seen  day through, so as to catch
more stuff; but that warn’t pap’s style.  Nine logs was enough for one
time; he must shove right over to town  sell.  So he locked me in 
took  skiff,  started off towing  raft about half-past three.
 I judged he wouldn’t come back that night.  I waited till I reckoned he
had got a good start; n I out with my saw,  went to work on that
log again.  Before he was t’or side of  river I was out of 
hole; him  his raft was just a speck on  water away off yonder.

I took  sack of corn meal  took it to where  canoe was hid, 
shoved  vines  branches apart  put it in; n I done  same
with  side of bacon; n  whisky-jug.  I took all  coffee 
sugar re was,  all  ammunition; I took  wadding; I took 
bucket  gourd; I took a dipper  a tin cup,  my old saw  two
blankets,   skillet   coffee-pot.  I took fish-lines 
matches  or things--everything that was worth a cent.  I cleaned
out  place.  I wanted an axe, but re wasn’t any, only  one out
at  woodpile,  I knowed why I was going to leave that.  I fetched
out  gun,  now I was done.

I had wore  ground a good deal crawling out of  hole  dragging
out so many things.  So I fixed that as good as I could from  outside
by scattering dust on  place, which covered up  smoothness  
sawdust.  n I fixed  piece of log back into its place,  put two
rocks under it  one against it to hold it re, for it was bent up
at that place  didn’t quite touch ground.  If you stood four or five
foot away  didn’t know it was sawed, you wouldn’t never notice
it;  besides, this was  back of  cabin,  it warn’t likely
anybody would go fooling around re.

It was all grass clear to  canoe, so I hadn’t left a track.  I
followed around to see.  I stood on  bank  looked out over 
river.  All safe.  So I took  gun  went up a piece into  woods,
 was hunting around for some birds when I see a wild pig; hogs soon
went wild in m bottoms after y had got away from  prairie
farms. I shot this fellow  took him into camp.

I took  axe  smashed in  door.  I beat it  hacked it
considerable a-doing it.  I fetched  pig in,  took him back nearly
to  table  hacked into his throat with  axe,  laid him down
on  ground to bleed; I say ground because it was ground--hard packed,
 no boards.  Well, next I took an old sack  put a lot of big rocks
in it--all I could drag-- I started it from  pig,  dragged it to
 door  through  woods down to  river  dumped it in, 
down it sunk, out of sight.  You could easy see that something had been
dragged over  ground.  I did wish Tom Sawyer was re; I knowed he
would take an interest in this kind of business,  throw in  fancy
touches.  Nobody could spread himself like Tom Sawyer in such a thing as
that.

Well, last I pulled out some of my hair,  blooded  axe good, 
stuck it on  back side,  slung  axe in  corner.  n I
took up  pig  held him to my breast with my jacket (so he couldn’t
drip) till I got a good piece below  house  n dumped him into
 river.  Now I thought of something else.  So I went  got  bag
of meal  my old saw out of  canoe,  fetched m to  house.
 I took  bag to where it used to st,  ripped a hole in 
bottom of it with  saw, for re warn’t no knives  forks on 
place--pap done everything with his clasp-knife about  cooking.  n
I carried  sack about a hundred yards across  grass  through
 willows east of  house, to a shallow lake that was five mile wide
 full of rushes-- ducks too, you might say, in  season.  re
was a slough or a creek leading out of it on  or side that went
miles away, I don’t know where, but it didn’t go to  river.   meal
sifted out  made a little track all  way to  lake.  I dropped
pap’s whetstone re too, so as to look like it had been done by
accident. n I tied up  rip in  meal sack with a string, so it
wouldn’t leak no more,  took it  my saw to  canoe again.

It was about dark now; so I dropped  canoe down  river under some
willows that hung over  bank,  waited for  moon to rise.  I
made fast to a willow; n I took a bite to eat,  by  by laid
down in  canoe to smoke a pipe  lay out a plan.  I says to myself,
y’ll follow  track of that sackful of rocks to  shore  n
drag  river for me.   y’ll follow that meal track to  lake
 go browsing down  creek that leads out of it to find  robbers
that killed me  took  things.  y won’t ever hunt  river for
anything but my dead carcass. y’ll soon get tired of that,  won’t
bor no more about me.  All right; I can stop anywhere I want to.
Jackson’s Isl is good enough for me; I know that isl pretty well,
 nobody ever comes re.   n I can paddle over to town nights,
 slink around  pick up things I want. Jackson’s Isl’s 
place.

I was pretty tired,   first thing I knowed I was asleep.  When
I woke up I didn’t know where I was for a minute.  I set up  looked
around, a little scared.  n I remembered.   river looked miles 
miles across.   moon was so bright I could a counted  drift logs
that went a-slipping along, black  still, hundreds of yards out from
shore. Everything was dead quiet,  it looked late,  _smelt_ late.
You know what I mean--I don’t know  words to put it in.

I took a good gap  a stretch,  was just going to unhitch  start
when I heard a sound away over  water.  I listened.  Pretty soon I
made it out.  It was that dull kind of a regular sound that comes from
oars working in rowlocks when it’s a still night.  I peeped out through
 willow branches,  re it was--a skiff, away across  water.
 I couldn’t tell how many was in it.  It kept a-coming,  when it was
abreast of me I see re warn’t but one man in it.  Think’s I, maybe
it’s pap, though I warn’t expecting him.  He dropped below me with 
current,  by  by he came a-swinging up shore in  easy water,
 he went by so close I could a reached out  gun  touched him.
 Well, it _was_ pap, sure enough-- sober, too, by  way he laid his
oars.

I didn’t lose no time.   next minute I was a-spinning down stream
soft but quick in  shade of  bank.  I made two mile  a half,
 n struck out a quarter of a mile or more towards  middle of
 river, because pretty soon I would be passing  ferry ling, 
people might see me  hail me.  I got out amongst  driftwood, 
n laid down in  bottom of  canoe  let her float.

 I laid re,  had a good rest  a smoke out of my pipe, looking
away into  sky; not a cloud in it.   sky looks ever so deep when
you lay down on your back in  moonshine; I never knowed it before.
  how far a body can hear on  water such nights!  I heard people
talking at  ferry ling. I heard what y said, too--every word
of it.  One man said it was getting towards  long days   short
nights now.  T’or one said _this_ warn’t one of  short ones, he
reckoned-- n y laughed,  he said it over again,  y
laughed again; n y waked up anor fellow  told him, 
laughed, but he didn’t laugh; he ripped out something brisk,  said
let him alone.   first fellow said he ‘lowed to tell it to his
old woman--she would think it was pretty good; but he said that warn’t
nothing to some things he had said in his time. I heard one man say it
was nearly three o’clock,  he hoped daylight wouldn’t wait more than
about a week longer.  After that  talk got furr  furr away,
 I couldn’t make out  words any more; but I could hear  mumble,
 now  n a laugh, too, but it seemed a long ways off.

I was away below  ferry now.  I rose up,  re was Jackson’s
Isl, about two mile  a half down stream, heavy timbered 
sting up out of  middle of  river, big  dark  solid, like
a steamboat without any lights.  re warn’t any signs of  bar at
 head--it was all under water now.

It didn’t take me long to get re.  I shot past  head at a ripping
rate,  current was so swift,  n I got into  dead water 
led on  side towards  Illinois shore.  I run  canoe into
a deep dent in  bank that I knowed about; I had to part  willow
branches to get in;  when I made fast nobody could a seen  canoe
from  outside.

I went up  set down on a log at  head of  isl,  looked
out on  big river   black driftwood  away over to  town,
three mile away, where re was three or four lights twinkling.  A
monstrous big lumber-raft was about a mile up stream, coming along down,
with a lantern in  middle of it.  I watched it come creeping down,
 when it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say, “Stern
oars, re! heave her head to stabboard!”  I heard that just as plain
as if  man was by my side.

re was a little gray in  sky now; so I stepped into  woods, 
laid down for a nap before breakfast.




CHAPTER VIII.

 sun was up so high when I waked that I judged it was after eight
o’clock.  I laid re in  grass   cool shade thinking about
things,  feeling rested  rur comfortable  satisfied.  I
could see  sun out at one or two holes, but mostly it was big trees
all about,  gloomy in re amongst m.  re was freckled places
on  ground where  light sifted down through  leaves,  
freckled places swapped about a little, showing re was a little
breeze up re.  A couple of squirrels set on a limb  jabbered at me
very friendly.

I was powerful lazy  comfortable--didn’t want to get up  cook
breakfast.  Well, I was dozing off again when I thinks I hears a deep
sound of “boom!” away up  river.  I rouses up,  rests on my elbow
 listens; pretty soon I hears it again.  I hopped up,  went 
looked out at a hole in  leaves,  I see a bunch of smoke laying
on  water a long ways up--about abreast  ferry.   re was 
ferryboat full of people floating along down.  I knowed what was 
matter now.  “Boom!” I see  white smoke squirt out of  ferryboat’s
side.  You see, y was firing cannon over  water, trying to make my
carcass come to  top.

I was pretty hungry, but it warn’t going to do for me to start a fire,
because y might see  smoke.  So I set re  watched 
cannon-smoke  listened to  boom.   river was a mile wide re,
 it always looks pretty on a summer morning--so I was having a good
enough time seeing m hunt for my remainders if I only had a bite to
eat. Well, n I happened to think how y always put quicksilver in
loaves of bread  float m off, because y always go right to 
drownded carcass  stop re.  So, says I, I’ll keep a lookout, 
if any of m’s floating around after me I’ll give m a show.  I
changed to  Illinois edge of  isl to see what luck I could
have,  I warn’t disappointed.  A big double loaf come along,  I
most got it with a long stick, but my foot slipped  she floated out
furr.  Of course I was where  current set in  closest to 
shore--I knowed enough for that.  But by  by along comes anor one,
 this time I won.  I took out  plug  shook out  little dab
of quicksilver,  set my teeth in.  It was “baker’s bread”--what 
quality eat; none of your low-down corn-pone.

I got a good place amongst  leaves,  set re on a log, munching
 bread  watching  ferry-boat,  very well satisfied.  
n something struck me.  I says, now I reckon  widow or  parson
or somebody prayed that this bread would find me,  here it has gone
 done it.  So re ain’t no doubt but re is something in that
thing--that is, re’s something in it when a body like  widow or 
parson prays, but it don’t work for me,  I reckon it don’t work for
only just  right kind.

I lit a pipe  had a good long smoke,  went on watching.  
ferryboat was floating with  current,  I allowed I’d have a chance
to see who was aboard when she come along, because she would come in
close, where  bread did.  When she’d got pretty well along down
towards me, I put out my pipe  went to where I fished out  bread,
 laid down behind a log on  bank in a little open place.  Where
 log forked I could peep through.

By  by she come along,  she drifted in so close that y could
a run out a plank  walked ashore.  Most everybody was on  boat.
 Pap,  Judge Thatcher,  Bessie Thatcher,  Jo Harper,  Tom
Sawyer,  his old Aunt Polly,  Sid  Mary,  plenty more.
 Everybody was talking about  murder, but  captain broke in 
says:

“Look sharp, now;  current sets in  closest here,  maybe he’s
washed ashore  got tangled amongst  brush at  water’s edge.  I
hope so, anyway.”

I didn’t hope so.  y all crowded up  leaned over  rails, nearly
in my face,  kept still, watching with all ir might.  I could see
m first-rate, but y couldn’t see me.  n  captain sung out:

“St away!”   cannon let off such a blast right before me that
it made me deef with  noise  pretty near blind with  smoke, 
I judged I was gone.  If y’d a had some bullets in, I reckon y’d
a got  corpse y was after.  Well, I see I warn’t hurt, thanks to
goodness.  boat floated on  went out of sight around  shoulder
of  isl.  I could hear  booming now  n, furr 
furr off,  by  by, after an hour, I didn’t hear it no more.
  isl was three mile long.  I judged y had got to  foot, 
was giving it up.  But y didn’t yet a while.  y turned around
 foot of  isl  started up  channel on  Missouri side,
under steam,  booming once in a while as y went.  I crossed over
to that side  watched m. When y got abreast  head of 
isl y quit shooting  dropped over to  Missouri shore 
went home to  town.

I knowed I was all right now.  Nobody else would come a-hunting after
me. I got my traps out of  canoe  made me a nice camp in  thick
woods.  I made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things
under so  rain couldn’t get at m.  I catched a catfish  haggled
him open with my saw,  towards sundown I started my camp fire  had
supper.  n I set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast.

When it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking,  feeling pretty well
satisfied; but by  by it got sort of lonesome,  so I went  set
on  bank  listened to  current swashing along,  counted 
stars  drift logs  rafts that come down,  n went to bed;
re ain’t no better way to put in time when you are lonesome; you
can’t stay so, you soon get over it.

 so for three days  nights.  No difference--just  same thing.
But  next day I went exploring around down through  isl.  I was
boss of it; it all belonged to me, so to say,  I wanted to know
all about it; but mainly I wanted to put in  time.  I found plenty
strawberries, ripe  prime;  green summer grapes,  green
razberries;   green blackberries was just beginning to show.  y
would all come hy by  by, I judged.

Well, I went fooling along in  deep woods till I judged I warn’t
far from  foot of  isl.  I had my gun along, but I hadn’t shot
nothing; it was for protection; thought I would kill some game nigh
home. About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake,
 it went sliding off through  grass  flowers,  I after
it, trying to get a shot at it. I clipped along,  all of a sudden I
bounded right on to  ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking.

My heart jumped up amongst my lungs.  I never waited for to look
furr, but uncocked my gun  went sneaking back on my tiptoes as
fast as ever I could.  Every now  n I stopped a second amongst 
thick leaves  listened, but my breath come so hard I couldn’t hear
nothing else.  I slunk along anor piece furr, n listened again;
 so on,  so on.  If I see a stump, I took it for a man; if I trod
on a stick  broke it, it made me feel like a person had cut one of my
breaths in two  I only got half,   short half, too.

When I got to camp I warn’t feeling very brash, re warn’t much s
in my craw; but I says, this ain’t no time to be fooling around.  So I
got all my traps into my canoe again so as to have m out of sight,
 I put out  fire  scattered  ashes around to look like an
old last year’s camp,  n clumb a tree.

I reckon I was up in  tree two hours; but I didn’t see nothing,
I didn’t hear nothing--I only _thought_ I heard  seen as much as a
thous things.  Well, I couldn’t stay up re forever; so at last I
got down, but I kept in  thick woods  on  lookout all 
time. All I could get to eat was berries  what was left over from
breakfast.

By  time it was night I was pretty hungry.  So when it was good
 dark I slid out from shore before moonrise  paddled over to 
Illinois bank--about a quarter of a mile.  I went out in  woods 
cooked a supper,  I had about made up my mind I would stay re
all night when I hear a _plunkety-plunk, plunkety-plunk_,  says
to myself, horses coming;  next I hear people’s voices.  I got
everything into  canoe as quick as I could,  n went creeping
through  woods to see what I could find out.  I hadn’t got far when I
hear a man say:

“We better camp here if we can find a good place;  horses is about
beat out.  Let’s look around.”

I didn’t wait, but shoved out  paddled away easy.  I tied up in 
old place,  reckoned I would sleep in  canoe.

I didn’t sleep much.  I couldn’t, somehow, for thinking.   every time
I waked up I thought somebody had me by  neck.  So  sleep didn’t
do me no good.  By  by I says to myself, I can’t live this way; I’m
a-going to find out who it is that’s here on  isl with me; I’ll
find it out or bust.  Well, I felt better right off.

So I took my paddle  slid out from shore just a step or two, 
n let  canoe drop along down amongst  shadows.   moon was
shining,  outside of  shadows it made it most as light as day.
 I poked along well on to an hour, everything still as rocks  sound
asleep. Well, by this time I was most down to  foot of  isl.  A
little ripply, cool breeze begun to blow,  that was as good as saying
 night was about done.  I give her a turn with  paddle  brung
her nose to shore; n I got my gun  slipped out  into  edge
of  woods.  I sat down re on a log,  looked out through 
leaves.  I see  moon go off watch,   darkness begin to blanket
 river. But in a little while I see a pale streak over  treetops,
 knowed  day was coming.  So I took my gun  slipped off towards
where I had run across that camp fire, stopping every minute or two
to listen.  But I hadn’t no luck somehow; I couldn’t seem to find 
place.  But by  by, sure enough, I catched a glimpse of fire away
through  trees.  I went for it, cautious  slow.  By  by I was
close enough to have a look,  re laid a man on  ground.  It
most give me  fan-tods. He had a blanket around his head,  his
head was nearly in  fire.  I set re behind a clump of bushes, in
about six foot of him,  kept my eyes on him steady.  It was getting
gray daylight now.  Pretty soon he gapped  stretched himself  hove
off  blanket,  it was Miss Watson’s Jim!  I bet I was glad to see
him.  I says:

“Hello, Jim!”  skipped out.

He bounced up  stared at me wild.  n he drops down on his knees,
 puts his hs toger  says:

“Doan’ hurt me--don’t!  I hain’t ever done no harm to a ghos’.  I alwuz
liked dead people, en done all I could for ‘em.  You go en git in de
river agin, whah you b’longs, en doan’ do nuffn to Ole Jim, ‘at ‘uz
awluz yo’ fren’.”

Well, I warn’t long making him underst I warn’t dead.  I was ever so
glad to see Jim.  I warn’t lonesome now.  I told him I warn’t afraid of
_him_ telling  people where I was.  I talked along, but he only set
re  looked at me; never said nothing.  n I says:

“It’s good daylight.  Le’s get breakfast.  Make up your camp fire good.”

“What’s de use er makin’ up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich
truck? But you got a gun, hain’t you?  Den we kin git sumfn better den
strawbries.”

“Strawberries  such truck,” I says.  “Is that what you live on?”

“I couldn’ git nuffn else,” he says.

“Why, how long you been on  isl, Jim?”

“I come heah de night arter you’s killed.”

“What, all that time?”

“Yes--indeedy.”

“ ain’t you had nothing but that kind of rubbage to eat?”

“No, sah--nuffn else.”

“Well, you must be most starved, ain’t you?”

“I reck’n I could eat a hoss.  I think I could. How long you ben on de
islan’?”

“Since  night I got killed.”

“No!  W’y, what has you lived on?  But you got a gun.  Oh, yes, you got
a gun.  Dat’s good.  Now you kill sumfn en I’ll make up de fire.”

So we went over to where  canoe was,  while he built a fire in
a grassy open place amongst  trees, I fetched meal  bacon 
coffee,  coffee-pot  frying-pan,  sugar  tin cups,  
nigger was set back considerable, because he reckoned it was all done
with witchcraft. I catched a good big catfish, too,  Jim cleaned him
with his knife,  fried him.

When breakfast was ready we lolled on  grass  eat it smoking hot.
Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was most about starved.  n
when we had got pretty well stuffed, we laid off  lazied.  By  by
Jim says:

“But looky here, Huck, who wuz it dat ‘uz killed in dat shanty ef it
warn’t you?”

n I told him  whole thing,  he said it was smart.  He said Tom
Sawyer couldn’t get up no better plan than what I had.  n I says:

“How do you come to be here, Jim,  how’d you get here?”

He looked pretty uneasy,  didn’t say nothing for a minute.  n he
says:

“Maybe I better not tell.”

“Why, Jim?”

“Well, dey’s reasons.  But you wouldn’ tell on me ef I uz to tell you,
would you, Huck?”

“Blamed if I would, Jim.”

“Well, I b’lieve you, Huck.  I--_I run off_.”

“Jim!”

“But mind, you said you wouldn’ tell--you know you said you wouldn’ tell,
Huck.”

“Well, I did.  I said I wouldn’t,  I’ll stick to it.  Honest _injun_,
I will.  People would call me a low-down Abolitionist  despise me for
keeping mum--but that don’t make no difference.  I ain’t a-going to tell,
 I ain’t a-going back re, anyways.  So, now, le’s know all about
it.”

“Well, you see, it ‘uz dis way.  Ole missus--dat’s Miss Watson--she pecks
on me all de time, en treats me pooty rough, but she awluz said she
wouldn’ sell me down to Orleans.  But I noticed dey wuz a nigger trader
roun’ de place considable lately, en I begin to git oneasy.  Well, one
night I creeps to de do’ pooty late, en de do’ warn’t quite shet, en I
hear old missus tell de widder she gwyne to sell me down to Orleans, but
she didn’ want to, but she could git eight hund’d dollars for me, en it
‘uz sich a big stack o’ money she couldn’ resis’.  De widder she try to
git her to say she wouldn’ do it, but I never waited to hear de res’.  I
lit out mighty quick, I tell you.

“I tuck out en shin down de hill, en ‘spec to steal a skift ‘long de
sho’ som’ers ‘bove de town, but dey wuz people a-stirring yit, so I hid
in de ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for everybody to
go ‘way. Well, I wuz dah all night.  Dey wuz somebody roun’ all de time.
 ‘Long ‘bout six in de mawnin’ skifts begin to go by, en ‘bout eight er
nine every skift dat went ‘long wuz talkin’ ‘bout how yo’ pap come over
to de town en say you’s killed.  Dese las’ skifts wuz full o’ ladies en
genlmen a-goin’ over for to see de place.  Sometimes dey’d pull up at
de sho’ en take a res’ b’fo’ dey started acrost, so by de talk I got to
know all ‘bout de killin’.  I ‘uz powerful sorry you’s killed, Huck, but
I ain’t no mo’ now.

“I laid dah under de shavin’s all day.  I ‘uz hungry, but I warn’t
afeard; bekase I knowed ole missus en de widder wuz goin’ to start to
de camp-meet’n’ right arter breakfas’ en be gone all day, en dey knows
I goes off wid de cattle ‘bout daylight, so dey wouldn’ ‘spec to see me
roun’ de place, en so dey wouldn’ miss me tell arter dark in de evenin’.
De yur servants wouldn’ miss me, kase dey’d shin out en take holiday
soon as de ole folks ‘uz out’n de way.

“Well, when it come dark I tuck out up de river road, en went ‘bout two
mile er more to whah dey warn’t no houses.  I’d made up my mine ‘bout
what I’s agwyne to do.  You see, ef I kep’ on tryin’ to git away afoot,
de dogs ‘ud track me; ef I stole a skift to cross over, dey’d miss dat
skift, you see, en dey’d know ‘bout whah I’d lan’ on de yur side, en
whah to pick up my track.  So I says, a raff is what I’s arter; it doan’
_make_ no track.

“I see a light a-comin’ roun’ de p’int bymeby, so I wade’ in en shove’
a log ahead o’ me en swum more’n half way acrost de river, en got in
‘mongst de drift-wood, en kep’ my head down low, en kinder swum agin de
current tell de raff come along.  Den I swum to de stern uv it en tuck
a-holt.  It clouded up en ‘uz pooty dark for a little while.  So I clumb
up en laid down on de planks.  De men ‘uz all ‘way yonder in de middle,
whah de lantern wuz.  De river wuz a-risin’, en dey wuz a good current;
so I reck’n’d ‘at by fo’ in de mawnin’ I’d be twenty-five mile down de
river, en den I’d slip in jis b’fo’ daylight en swim asho’, en take to
de woods on de Illinois side.

“But I didn’ have no luck.  When we ‘uz mos’ down to de head er de
islan’ a man begin to come aft wid de lantern, I see it warn’t no use
fer to wait, so I slid overboard en struck out fer de islan’.  Well, I
had a notion I could lan’ mos’ anywhers, but I couldn’t--bank too bluff.
 I ‘uz mos’ to de foot er de islan’ b’fo’ I found’ a good place.  I went
into de woods en jedged I wouldn’ fool wid raffs no mo’, long as dey
move de lantern roun’ so.  I had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg, en some
matches in my cap, en dey warn’t wet, so I ‘uz all right.”

“ so you ain’t had no meat nor bread to eat all this time?  Why
didn’t you get mud-turkles?”

“How you gwyne to git ‘m?  You can’t slip up on um en grab um; en how’s
a body gwyne to hit um wid a rock?  How could a body do it in de night?
 En I warn’t gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de daytime.”

“Well, that’s so.  You’ve had to keep in  woods all  time, of
course. Did you hear ‘em shooting  cannon?”

“Oh, yes.  I knowed dey was arter you.  I see um go by heah--watched um
thoo de bushes.”

Some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a time 
lighting. Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain.  He said it was
a sign when young chickens flew that way,  so he reckoned it was 
same way when young birds done it.  I was going to catch some of m,
but Jim wouldn’t let me.  He said it was death.  He said his far laid
mighty sick once,  some of m catched a bird,  his old granny
said his far would die,  he did.

 Jim said you mustn’t count  things you are going to cook for
dinner, because that would bring bad luck.   same if you shook 
table-cloth after sundown.   he said if a man owned a beehive
 that man died,  bees must be told about it before sun-up next
morning, or else  bees would all weaken down  quit work  die.
 Jim said bees wouldn’t sting idiots; but I didn’t believe that, because
I had tried m lots of times myself,  y wouldn’t sting me.

I had heard about some of se things before, but not all of m.  Jim
knowed all kinds of signs.  He said he knowed most everything.  I said
it looked to me like all  signs was about bad luck,  so I asked
him if re warn’t any good-luck signs.  He says:

“Mighty few--an’ _dey_ ain’t no use to a body.  What you want to know
when good luck’s a-comin’ for?  Want to keep it off?”   he said:  “Ef
you’s got hairy arms en a hairy breas’, it’s a sign dat you’s agwyne
to be rich. Well, dey’s some use in a sign like dat, ‘kase it’s so fur
ahead. You see, maybe you’s got to be po’ a long time fust, en so you
might git discourage’ en kill yo’sef ‘f you didn’ know by de sign dat
you gwyne to be rich bymeby.”

“Have you got hairy arms  a hairy breast, Jim?”

“What’s de use to ax dat question?  Don’t you see I has?”

“Well, are you rich?”

“No, but I ben rich wunst,  gwyne to be rich agin.  Wunst I had
foteen dollars, but I tuck to specalat’n’, en got busted out.”

“What did you speculate in, Jim?”

“Well, fust I tackled stock.”

“What kind of stock?”

“Why, live stock--cattle, you know.  I put ten dollars in a cow.  But
I ain’ gwyne to resk no mo’ money in stock.  De cow up ‘n’ died on my
han’s.”

“So you lost  ten dollars.”

“No, I didn’t lose it all.  I on’y los’ ‘bout nine of it.  I sole de
hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents.”

“You had five dollars  ten cents left.  Did you speculate any more?”

“Yes.  You know that one-laigged nigger dat b’longs to old Misto
Bradish? Well, he sot up a bank, en say anybody dat put in a dollar
would git fo’ dollars mo’ at de en’ er de year.  Well, all de niggers
went in, but dey didn’t have much.  I wuz de on’y one dat had much.  So
I stuck out for mo’ dan fo’ dollars, en I said ‘f I didn’ git it I’d
start a bank mysef. Well, o’ course dat nigger want’ to keep me out er
de business, bekase he says dey warn’t business ‘nough for two banks, so
he say I could put in my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de en’
er de year.

“So I done it.  Den I reck’n’d I’d inves’ de thirty-five dollars right
off en keep things a-movin’.  Dey wuz a nigger name’ Bob, dat had
ketched a wood-flat, en his marster didn’ know it; en I bought it off’n
him en told him to take de thirty-five dollars when de en’ er de
year come; but somebody stole de wood-flat dat night, en nex day de
one-laigged nigger say de bank’s busted.  So dey didn’ none uv us git no
money.”

“What did you do with  ten cents, Jim?”

“Well, I ‘uz gwyne to spen’ it, but I had a dream, en de dream tole me
to give it to a nigger name’ Balum--Balum’s Ass dey call him for short;
he’s one er dem chuckleheads, you know.  But he’s lucky, dey say, en I
see I warn’t lucky.  De dream say let Balum inves’ de ten cents en he’d
make a raise for me.  Well, Balum he tuck de money, en when he wuz in
church he hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po’ len’ to de
Lord, en boun’ to git his money back a hund’d times.  So Balum he tuck
en give de ten cents to de po’, en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to
come of it.”

“Well, what did come of it, Jim?”

“Nuffn never come of it.  I couldn’ manage to k’leck dat money no way;
en Balum he couldn’.  I ain’ gwyne to len’ no mo’ money ‘dout I see de
security.  Boun’ to git yo’ money back a hund’d times, de preacher says!
Ef I could git de ten _cents_ back, I’d call it squah, en be glad er de
chanst.”

“Well, it’s all right anyway, Jim, long as you’re going to be rich again
some time or or.”

“Yes; en I’s rich now, come to look at it.  I owns mysef, en I’s wuth
eight hund’d dollars.  I wisht I had de money, I wouldn’ want no mo’.”




CHAPTER IX.

I wanted to go  look at a place right about  middle of  isl
that I’d found when I was exploring; so we started  soon got to it,
because  isl was only three miles long  a quarter of a mile
wide.

This place was a tolerable long, steep hill or ridge about forty foot
high. We had a rough time getting to  top,  sides was so steep 
 bushes so thick.  We tramped  clumb around all over it,  by
 by found a good big cavern in  rock, most up to  top on 
side towards Illinois.   cavern was as big as two or three rooms
bunched toger,  Jim could st up straight in it.  It was cool in
re. Jim was for putting our traps in re right away, but I said we
didn’t want to be climbing up  down re all  time.

Jim said if we had  canoe hid in a good place,  had all  traps
in  cavern, we could rush re if anybody was to come to  isl,
 y would never find us without dogs.  , besides, he said m
little birds had said it was going to rain,  did I want  things to
get wet?

So we went back  got  canoe,  paddled up abreast  cavern,
 lugged all  traps up re.  n we hunted up a place close by
to hide  canoe in, amongst  thick willows.  We took some fish off
of  lines  set m again,  begun to get ready for dinner.

 door of  cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in,  on one
side of  door  floor stuck out a little bit,  was flat  a
good place to build a fire on.  So we built it re  cooked dinner.

We spread  blankets inside for a carpet,  eat our dinner in re.
We put all  or things hy at  back of  cavern.  Pretty
soon it darkened up,  begun to thunder  lighten; so  birds was
right about it.  Directly it begun to rain,  it rained like all fury,
too,  I never see  wind blow so.  It was one of se regular
summer storms.  It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black
outside,  lovely;   rain would thrash along by so thick that
 trees off a little ways looked dim  spider-webby;  here would
come a blast of wind that would bend  trees down  turn up 
pale underside of  leaves;  n a perfect ripper of a gust would
follow along  set  branches to tossing ir arms as if y
was just wild;  next, when it was just about  bluest 
blackest--_FST_! it was as bright as glory,  you’d have a little
glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yonder in  storm,
hundreds of yards furr than you could see before; dark as sin again
in a second,  now you’d hear  thunder let go with an awful crash,
 n go rumbling, grumbling, tumbling, down  sky towards 
under side of  world, like rolling empty barrels down stairs--where
it’s long stairs  y bounce a good deal, you know.

“Jim, this is nice,” I says.  “I wouldn’t want to be nowhere else but
here. Pass me along anor hunk of fish  some hot corn-bread.”

“Well, you wouldn’t a ben here ‘f it hadn’t a ben for Jim.  You’d a ben
down dah in de woods widout any dinner, en gittn’ mos’ drownded, too;
dat you would, honey.  Chickens knows when it’s gwyne to rain, en so do
de birds, chile.”

 river went on raising  raising for ten or twelve days, till at
last it was over  banks.   water was three or four foot deep on
 isl in  low places  on  Illinois bottom.  On that side
it was a good many miles wide, but on  Missouri side it was  same
old distance across--a half a mile--because  Missouri shore was just a
wall of high bluffs.

Daytimes we paddled all over  isl in  canoe, It was mighty cool
 shady in  deep woods, even if  sun was blazing outside.  We
went winding in  out amongst  trees,  sometimes  vines hung
so thick we had to back away  go some or way.  Well, on every old
broken-down tree you could see rabbits  snakes  such things; 
when  isl had been overflowed a day or two y got so tame, on
account of being hungry, that you could paddle right up  put your
h on m if you wanted to; but not  snakes  turtles--y would
slide off in  water.   ridge our cavern was in was full of m.
We could a had pets enough if we’d wanted m.

One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft--nice pine planks.
It was twelve foot wide  about fifteen or sixteen foot long, 
 top stood above water six or seven inches--a solid, level floor.  We
could see saw-logs go by in  daylight sometimes, but we let m go;
we didn’t show ourselves in daylight.

Anor night when we was up at  head of  isl, just before
daylight, here comes a frame-house down, on  west side.  She was
a two-story,  tilted over considerable.  We paddled out  got
aboard--clumb in at an upstairs window.  But it was too dark to see yet,
so we made  canoe fast  set in her to wait for daylight.

 light begun to come before we got to  foot of  isl.  n
we looked in at  window.  We could make out a bed,  a table, 
two old chairs,  lots of things around about on  floor,  re
was clos hanging against  wall.  re was something laying on 
floor in  far corner that looked like a man.  So Jim says:

“Hello, you!”

But it didn’t budge.  So I hollered again,  n Jim says:

“De man ain’t asleep--he’s dead.  You hold still--I’ll go en see.”

He went,  bent down  looked,  says:

“It’s a dead man.  Yes, indeedy; naked, too.  He’s ben shot in de back.
I reck’n he’s ben dead two er three days.  Come in, Huck, but doan’ look
at his face--it’s too gashly.”

I didn’t look at him at all.  Jim throwed some old rags over him, but
he needn’t done it; I didn’t want to see him.  re was heaps of old
greasy cards scattered around over  floor,  old whisky bottles,
 a couple of masks made out of black cloth;  all over  walls
was  ignorantest kind of words  pictures made with charcoal.
 re was two old dirty calico dresses,  a sun-bonnet,  some
women’s underclos hanging against  wall,  some men’s clothing,
too.  We put  lot into  canoe--it might come good.  re was a
boy’s old speckled straw hat on  floor; I took that, too.   re
was a bottle that had had milk in it,  it had a rag stopper for a
baby to suck.  We would a took  bottle, but it was broke.  re was
a seedy old chest,  an old hair trunk with  hinges broke.  y
stood open, but re warn’t nothing left in m that was any account.
  way things was scattered about we reckoned  people left in a
hurry,  warn’t fixed so as to carry off most of ir stuff.

We got an old tin lantern,  a butcher-knife without any hle, 
a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any store,  a lot of tallow
cles,  a tin clestick,  a gourd,  a tin cup,  a ratty
old bedquilt off  bed,  a reticule with needles  pins 
beeswax  buttons  thread  all such truck in it,  a hatchet
 some nails,  a fishline as thick as my little finger with some
monstrous hooks on it,  a roll of buckskin,  a lear dog-collar,
 a horseshoe,  some vials of medicine that didn’t have no label
on m;  just as we was leaving I found a tolerable good curry-comb,
 Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow,  a wooden leg.   straps
was broke off of it, but, barring that, it was a good enough leg, though
it was too long for me  not long enough for Jim,  we couldn’t find
 or one, though we hunted all around.

 so, take it all around, we made a good haul.  When we was ready to
shove off we was a quarter of a mile below  isl,  it was pretty
broad day; so I made Jim lay down in  canoe  cover up with 
quilt, because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good
ways off.  I paddled over to  Illinois shore,  drifted down most
a half a mile doing it.  I crept up  dead water under  bank, 
hadn’t no accidents  didn’t see nobody.  We got home all safe.




CHAPTER X.

AFTER breakfast I wanted to talk about  dead man  guess out how he
come to be killed, but Jim didn’t want to.  He said it would fetch bad
luck;  besides, he said, he might come  ha’nt us; he said a man
that warn’t buried was more likely to go a-ha’nting around than one
that was planted  comfortable.  That sounded pretty reasonable, so
I didn’t say no more; but I couldn’t keep from studying over it 
wishing I knowed who shot  man,  what y done it for.

We rummaged  clos we’d got,  found eight dollars in silver
sewed up in  lining of an old blanket overcoat.  Jim said he reckoned
 people in that house stole  coat, because if y’d a knowed 
money was re y wouldn’t a left it.  I said I reckoned y killed
him, too; but Jim didn’t want to talk about that.  I says:

“Now you think it’s bad luck; but what did you say when I fetched in 
snake-skin that I found on  top of  ridge day before yesterday?
You said it was  worst bad luck in  world to touch a snake-skin
with my hs.  Well, here’s your bad luck!  We’ve raked in all this
truck  eight dollars besides.  I wish we could have some bad luck
like this every day, Jim.”

“Never you mind, honey, never you mind.  Don’t you git too peart.  It’s
a-comin’.  Mind I tell you, it’s a-comin’.”

It did come, too.  It was a Tuesday that we had that talk.  Well, after
dinner Friday we was laying around in  grass at  upper end of 
ridge,  got out of tobacco.  I went to  cavern to get some, 
found a rattlesnake in re.  I killed him,  curled him up on 
foot of Jim’s blanket, ever so natural, thinking re’d be some fun
when Jim found him re.  Well, by night I forgot all about  snake,
 when Jim flung himself down on  blanket while I struck a light
 snake’s mate was re,  bit him.

He jumped up yelling,   first thing  light showed was 
varmint curled up  ready for anor spring.  I laid him out in a
second with a stick,  Jim grabbed pap’s whisky-jug  begun to pour
it down.

He was barefooted,   snake bit him right on  heel.  That all
comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave
a dead snake its mate always comes re  curls around it.  Jim told
me to chop off  snake’s head  throw it away,  n skin 
body  roast a piece of it.  I done it,  he eat it  said it
would help cure him. He made me take off  rattles  tie m around
his wrist, too.  He said that that would help.  n I slid out quiet
 throwed  snakes clear away amongst  bushes; for I warn’t going
to let Jim find out it was all my fault, not if I could help it.

Jim sucked  sucked at  jug,  now  n he got out of his
head  pitched around  yelled; but every time he come to himself he
went to sucking at  jug again.  His foot swelled up pretty big, 
so did his leg; but by  by  drunk begun to come,  so I judged
he was all right; but I’d drur been bit with a snake than pap’s
whisky.

Jim was laid up for four days  nights.  n  swelling was all
gone  he was around again.  I made up my mind I wouldn’t ever take
a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hs, now that I see what had come
of it. Jim said he reckoned I would believe him next time.   he said
that hling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we hadn’t
got to  end of it yet.  He said he drur see  new moon over his
left shoulder as much as a thous times than take up a snake-skin
in his h.  Well, I was getting to feel that way myself, though I’ve
always reckoned that looking at  new moon over your left shoulder is
one of  carelessest  foolishest things a body can do.  Old Hank
Bunker done it once,  bragged about it;  in less than two years he
got drunk  fell off of  shot-tower,  spread himself out so
that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say;  y slid him
edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin,  buried him so, so
y say, but I didn’t see it.  Pap told me.  But anyway it all come of
looking at  moon that way, like a fool.

Well,  days went along,   river went down between its banks
again;  about  first thing we done was to bait one of  big
hooks with a skinned rabbit  set it  catch a catfish that was
as big as a man, being six foot two inches long,  weighed over two
hundred pounds. We couldn’t hle him, of course; he would a flung us
into Illinois.  We just set re  watched him rip  tear around
till he drownded.  We found a brass button in his stomach  a round
ball,  lots of rubbage.  We split  ball open with  hatchet,
 re was a spool in it.  Jim said he’d had it re a long time, to
coat it over so  make a ball of it.  It was as big a fish as was ever
catched in  Mississippi, I reckon.  Jim said he hadn’t ever seen
a bigger one.  He would a been worth a good deal over at  village.
 y peddle out such a fish as that by  pound in  market-house
re; everybody buys some of him; his meat’s as white as snow  makes
a good fry.

Next morning I said it was getting slow  dull,  I wanted to get a
stirring up some way.  I said I reckoned I would slip over  river 
find out what was going on.  Jim liked that notion; but he said I
must go in  dark  look sharp.  n he studied it over  said,
couldn’t I put on some of m old things  dress up like a girl?
 That was a good notion, too.  So we shortened up one of  calico
gowns,  I turned up my trouser-legs to my knees  got into it.  Jim
hitched it behind with  hooks,  it was a fair fit.  I put on 
sun-bonnet  tied it under my chin,  n for a body to look in
 see my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe.  Jim said
nobody would know me, even in  daytime, hardly.  I practiced around
all day to get  hang of  things,  by  by I could do pretty
well in m, only Jim said I didn’t walk like a girl;  he said
I must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket.  I took
notice,  done better.

I started up  Illinois shore in  canoe just after dark.

I started across to  town from a little below  ferry-ling, 
 drift of  current fetched me in at  bottom of  town.  I
tied up  started along  bank.  re was a light burning in a
little shanty that hadn’t been lived in for a long time,  I wondered
who had took up quarters re.  I slipped up  peeped in at 
window.  re was a woman about forty year old in re knitting by
a cle that was on a pine table.  I didn’t know her face; she was a
stranger, for you couldn’t start a face in that town that I didn’t know.
 Now this was lucky, because I was weakening; I was getting afraid I had
come; people might know my voice  find me out.  But if this woman had
been in such a little town two days she could tell me all I wanted to
know; so I knocked at  door,  made up my mind I wouldn’t forget I
was a girl.




CHAPTER XI.

“COME in,” says  woman,  I did.  She says:  “Take a cheer.”

I done it.  She looked me all over with her little shiny eyes,  says:

“What might your name be?”

“Sarah Williams.”

“Where ‘bouts do you live?  In this neighborhood?’

“No’m.  In Hookerville, seven mile below.  I’ve walked all  way 
I’m all tired out.”

“Hungry, too, I reckon.  I’ll find you something.”

“No’m, I ain’t hungry.  I was so hungry I had to stop two miles below
here at a farm; so I ain’t hungry no more.  It’s what makes me so late.
My mor’s down sick,  out of money  everything,  I come to
tell my uncle Abner Moore.  He lives at  upper end of  town, she
says.  I hain’t ever been here before.  Do you know him?”

“No; but I don’t know everybody yet.  I haven’t lived here quite two
weeks. It’s a considerable ways to  upper end of  town.  You
better stay here all night.  Take off your bonnet.”

“No,” I says; “I’ll rest a while, I reckon,  go on.  I ain’t afeared
of  dark.”

She said she wouldn’t let me go by myself, but her husb would be in
by  by, maybe in a hour  a half,  she’d send him along with me.
n she got to talking about her husb,  about her relations up
 river,  her relations down  river,  about how much better
off y used to was,  how y didn’t know but y’d made a mistake
coming to our town, instead of letting well alone-- so on  so on,
till I was afeard I had made a mistake coming to her to find out what
was going on in  town; but by  by she dropped on to pap  
murder,  n I was pretty willing to let her clatter right along.
 She told about me  Tom Sawyer finding  six thous dollars (only
she got it ten)  all about pap  what a hard lot he was,  what
a hard lot I was,  at last she got down to where I was murdered.  I
says:

“Who done it?  We’ve heard considerable about se goings on down in
Hookerville, but we don’t know who ‘twas that killed Huck Finn.”

“Well, I reckon re’s a right smart chance of people _here_ that’d
like to know who killed him.  Some think old Finn done it himself.”

“No--is that so?”

“Most everybody thought it at first.  He’ll never know how nigh he come
to getting lynched.  But before night y changed around  judged it
was done by a runaway nigger named Jim.”

“Why _he_--”

I stopped.  I reckoned I better keep still.  She run on,  never
noticed I had put in at all:

“ nigger run off  very night Huck Finn was killed.  So re’s a
reward out for him--three hundred dollars.   re’s a reward out for
old Finn, too--two hundred dollars.  You see, he come to town 
morning after  murder,  told about it,  was out with ‘em on 
ferryboat hunt,  right away after he up  left.  Before night y
wanted to lynch him, but he was gone, you see.  Well, next day y
found out  nigger was gone; y found out he hadn’t ben seen sence
ten o’clock  night  murder was done.  So n y put it on him,
you see;  while y was full of it, next day, back comes old Finn,
 went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for 
nigger all over Illinois with.  judge gave him some,  that evening
he got drunk,  was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty
hard-looking strangers,  n went off with m.  Well, he hain’t
come back sence,  y ain’t looking for him back till this thing
blows over a little, for people thinks now that he killed his boy 
fixed things so folks would think robbers done it,  n he’d get
Huck’s money without having to bor a long time with a lawsuit.
 People do say he warn’t any too good to do it.  Oh, he’s sly, I reckon.
 If he don’t come back for a year he’ll be all right.  You can’t prove
anything on him, you know; everything will be quieted down n, 
he’ll walk in Huck’s money as easy as nothing.”

“Yes, I reckon so, ‘m.  I don’t see nothing in  way of it.  Has
everybody quit thinking  nigger done it?”

“Oh, no, not everybody.  A good many thinks he done it.  But y’ll get
 nigger pretty soon now,  maybe y can scare it out of him.”

“Why, are y after him yet?”

“Well, you’re innocent, ain’t you!  Does three hundred dollars lay
around every day for people to pick up?  Some folks think  nigger
ain’t far from here.  I’m one of m--but I hain’t talked it around.  A
few days ago I was talking with an old couple that lives next door in
 log shanty,  y happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to
that isl over yonder that y call Jackson’s Isl.  Don’t anybody
live re? says I. No, nobody, says y.  I didn’t say any more, but
I done some thinking.  I was pretty near certain I’d seen smoke over
re, about  head of  isl, a day or two before that, so I says
to myself, like as not that nigger’s hiding over re; anyway, says
I, it’s worth  trouble to give  place a hunt.  I hain’t seen any
smoke sence, so I reckon maybe he’s gone, if it was him; but husb’s
going over to see--him  anor man.  He was gone up  river; but he
got back to-day,  I told him as soon as he got here two hours ago.”

I had got so uneasy I couldn’t set still.  I had to do something with my
hs; so I took up a needle off of  table  went to threading
it. My hs shook,  I was making a bad job of it.  When  woman
stopped talking I looked up,  she was looking at me pretty curious
 smiling a little.  I put down  needle  thread,  let on to
be interested-- I was, too-- says:

“Three hundred dollars is a power of money.  I wish my mor could get
it. Is your husb going over re to-night?”

“Oh, yes.  He went up-town with  man I was telling you of, to get a
boat  see if y could borrow anor gun.  y’ll go over after
midnight.”

“Couldn’t y see better if y was to wait till daytime?”

“Yes.   couldn’t  nigger see better, too?  After midnight he’ll
likely be asleep,  y can slip around through  woods  hunt up
his camp fire all  better for  dark, if he’s got one.”

“I didn’t think of that.”

 woman kept looking at me pretty curious,  I didn’t feel a bit
comfortable.  Pretty soon she says,

“What did you say your name was, honey?”

“M--Mary Williams.”

Somehow it didn’t seem to me that I said it was Mary before, so I didn’t
look up--seemed to me I said it was Sarah; so I felt sort of cornered,
 was afeared maybe I was looking it, too.  I wished  woman would
say something more;  longer she set still  uneasier I was.  But
now she says:

“Honey, I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in?”

“Oh, yes’m, I did.  Sarah Mary Williams.  Sarah’s my first name.  Some
calls me Sarah, some calls me Mary.”

“Oh, that’s  way of it?”

“Yes’m.”

I was feeling better n, but I wished I was out of re, anyway.  I
couldn’t look up yet.

Well,  woman fell to talking about how hard times was,  how poor
y had to live,  how  rats was as free as if y owned 
place,  so forth  so on,  n I got easy again.  She was right
about  rats. You’d see one stick his nose out of a hole in  corner
every little while.  She said she had to have things hy to throw at
m when she was alone, or y wouldn’t give her no peace.  She showed
me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot,  said she was a good shot
with it generly, but she’d wrenched her arm a day or two ago,  didn’t
know wher she could throw true now.  But she watched for a chance,
 directly banged away at a rat; but she missed him wide,  said
“Ouch!” it hurt her arm so.  n she told me to try for  next one.
 I wanted to be getting away before  old man got back, but of course
I didn’t let on.  I got  thing,   first rat that showed his
nose I let drive,  if he’d a stayed where he was he’d a been a
tolerable sick rat.  She said that was first-rate,  she reckoned I
would hive  next one.  She went  got  lump of lead  fetched
it back,  brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help
her with.  I held up my two hs  she put  hank over m, 
went on talking about her  her husb’s matters.  But she broke off
to say:

“Keep your eye on  rats.  You better have  lead in your lap,
hy.”

So she dropped  lump into my lap just at that moment,  I clapped
my legs toger on it  she went on talking.  But only about a
minute. n she took off  hank  looked me straight in  face,
 very pleasant,  says:

“Come, now, what’s your real name?”

“Wh--what, mum?”

“What’s your real name?  Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob?--or what is it?”

I reckon I shook like a leaf,  I didn’t know hardly what to do.  But
I says:

“Please to don’t poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum.  If I’m in 
way here, I’ll--”

“No, you won’t.  Set down  stay where you are.  I ain’t going to hurt
you,  I ain’t going to tell on you, nur.  You just tell me your
secret,  trust me.  I’ll keep it; , what’s more, I’ll help
you. So’ll my old man if you want him to.  You see, you’re a runaway
‘prentice, that’s all.  It ain’t anything.  re ain’t no harm in it.
You’ve been treated bad,  you made up your mind to cut.  Bless you,
child, I wouldn’t tell on you.  Tell me all about it now, that’s a good
boy.”

So I said it wouldn’t be no use to try to play it any longer,  I
would just make a clean breast  tell her everything, but she musn’t
go back on her promise.  n I told her my far  mor was dead,
  law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in  country thirty
mile back from  river,  he treated me so bad I couldn’t st it
no longer; he went away to be gone a couple of days,  so I took my
chance  stole some of his daughter’s old clos  cleared out, 
I had been three nights coming  thirty miles.  I traveled nights,
 hid daytimes  slept,   bag of bread  meat I carried from
home lasted me all  way,  I had a-plenty.  I said I believed my
uncle Abner Moore would take care of me,  so that was why I struck
out for this town of Goshen.

“Goshen, child?  This ain’t Goshen.  This is St. Petersburg.  Goshen’s
ten mile furr up  river.  Who told you this was Goshen?”

“Why, a man I met at daybreak this morning, just as I was going to turn
into  woods for my regular sleep.  He told me when  roads forked I
must take  right h,  five mile would fetch me to Goshen.”

“He was drunk, I reckon.  He told you just exactly wrong.”

“Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain’t no matter now.  I got
to be moving along.  I’ll fetch Goshen before daylight.”

“Hold on a minute.  I’ll put you up a snack to eat.  You might want it.”

So she put me up a snack,  says:

“Say, when a cow’s laying down, which end of her gets up first?  Answer
up prompt now--don’t stop to study over it.  Which end gets up first?”

“ hind end, mum.”

“Well, n, a horse?”

“ for’rard end, mum.”

“Which side of a tree does  moss grow on?”

“North side.”

“If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of m eats with
ir heads pointed  same direction?”

“ whole fifteen, mum.”

“Well, I reckon you _have_ lived in  country.  I thought maybe you
was trying to hocus me again.  What’s your real name, now?”

“George Peters, mum.”

“Well, try to remember it, George.  Don’t forget  tell me it’s
Elexer before you go,  n get out by saying it’s George
Elexer when I catch you.   don’t go about women in that old
calico.  You do a girl tolerable poor, but you might fool men, maybe.
 Bless you, child, when you set out to thread a needle don’t hold 
thread still  fetch  needle up to it; hold  needle still 
poke  thread at it; that’s  way a woman most always does, but a
man always does t’or way.   when you throw at a rat or anything,
hitch yourself up a tiptoe  fetch your h up over your head as
awkward as you can,  miss your rat about six or seven foot. Throw
stiff-armed from  shoulder, like re was a pivot re for it to
turn on, like a girl; not from  wrist  elbow, with your arm out
to one side, like a boy.  , mind you, when a girl tries to catch
anything in her lap she throws her knees apart; she don’t clap m
toger,  way you did when you catched  lump of lead.  Why, I
spotted you for a boy when you was threading  needle;  I contrived
 or things just to make certain.  Now trot along to your uncle,
Sarah Mary Williams George Elexer Peters,  if you get into trouble
you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus, which is me,  I’ll do what I can
to get you out of it.  Keep  river road all  way,  next time
you tramp take shoes  socks with you.  river road’s a rocky one,
 your feet’ll be in a condition when you get to Goshen, I reckon.”

I went up  bank about fifty yards,  n I doubled on my tracks
 slipped back to where my canoe was, a good piece below  house.  I
jumped in,  was off in a hurry.  I went up-stream far enough to
make  head of  isl,  n started across.  I took off 
sun-bonnet, for I didn’t want no blinders on n.  When I was about 
middle I heard  clock begin to strike, so I stops  listens; 
sound come faint over  water but clear--eleven.  When I struck 
head of  isl I never waited to blow, though I was most winded, but
I shoved right into  timber where my old camp used to be,  started
a good fire re on a high  dry spot.

n I jumped in  canoe  dug out for our place, a mile  a half
below, as hard as I could go.  I led,  slopped through  timber
 up  ridge  into  cavern.  re Jim laid, sound asleep on
 ground.  I roused him out  says:

“Git up  hump yourself, Jim!  re ain’t a minute to lose.  y’re
after us!”

Jim never asked no questions, he never said a word; but  way he
worked for  next half an hour showed about how he was scared.  By
that time everything we had in  world was on our raft,  she was
ready to be shoved out from  willow cove where she was hid.  We
put out  camp fire at  cavern  first thing,  didn’t show a
cle outside after that.

I took  canoe out from  shore a little piece,  took a look;
but if re was a boat around I couldn’t see it, for stars  shadows
ain’t good to see by.  n we got out  raft  slipped along down
in  shade, past  foot of  isl dead still--never saying a
word.




CHAPTER XII.

IT must a been close on to one o’clock when we got below  isl at
last,   raft did seem to go mighty slow.  If a boat was to come
along we was going to take to  canoe  break for  Illinois
shore;  it was well a boat didn’t come, for we hadn’t ever thought to
put  gun in  canoe, or a fishing-line, or anything to eat.  We
was in rur too much of a sweat to think of so many things.  It warn’t
good judgment to put _everything_ on  raft.

If  men went to  isl I just expect y found  camp fire I
built,  watched it all night for Jim to come.  Anyways, y stayed
away from us,  if my building  fire never fooled m it warn’t no
fault of mine.  I played it as low down on m as I could.

When  first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a
big bend on  Illinois side,  hacked off cottonwood branches with
 hatchet,  covered up  raft with m so she looked like re
had been a cave-in in  bank re.  A tow-head is a sbar that has
cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth.

We had mountains on  Missouri shore  heavy timber on  Illinois
side,   channel was down  Missouri shore at that place, so we
warn’t afraid of anybody running across us.  We laid re all day,
 watched  rafts  steamboats spin down  Missouri shore, 
up-bound steamboats fight  big river in  middle.  I told Jim all
about  time I had jabbering with that woman;  Jim said she was
a smart one,  if she was to start after us herself she wouldn’t set
down  watch a camp fire--no, sir, she’d fetch a dog.  Well, n, I
said, why couldn’t she tell her husb to fetch a dog?  Jim said he
bet she did think of it by  time  men was ready to start,  he
believed y must a gone up-town to get a dog  so y lost all that
time, or else we wouldn’t be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile
below  village--no, indeedy, we would be in that same old town again.
 So I said I didn’t care what was  reason y didn’t get us as long
as y didn’t.

When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of 
cottonwood thicket,  looked up  down  across; nothing in sight;
so Jim took up some of  top planks of  raft  built a snug
wigwam to get under in blazing wear  rainy,  to keep  things
dry. Jim made a floor for  wigwam,  raised it a foot or more above
 level of  raft, so now  blankets  all  traps was out of
reach of steamboat waves.  Right in  middle of  wigwam we made a
layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for
to hold it to its place; this was to build a fire on in sloppy wear
or chilly;  wigwam would keep it from being seen.  We made an extra
steering-oar, too, because one of  ors might get broke on a snag
or something. We fixed up a short forked stick to hang  old lantern
on, because we must always light  lantern whenever we see a steamboat
coming down-stream, to keep from getting run over; but we wouldn’t have
to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what y call
a “crossing”; for  river was pretty high yet, very low banks being
still a little under water; so up-bound boats didn’t always run 
channel, but hunted easy water.

This second night we run between seven  eight hours, with a current
that was making over four mile an hour.  We catched fish  talked,
 we took a swim now  n to keep off sleepiness.  It was kind of
solemn, drifting down  big, still river, laying on our backs looking
up at  stars,  we didn’t ever feel like talking loud,  it
warn’t often that we laughed--only a little kind of a low chuckle.  We
had mighty good wear as a general thing,  nothing ever happened to
us at all--that night, nor  next, nor  next.

Every night we passed towns, some of m away up on black hillsides,
nothing but just a shiny bed of lights; not a house could you see.  
fifth night we passed St. Louis,  it was like  whole world lit up.
In St. Petersburg y used to say re was twenty or thirty thous
people in St. Louis, but I never believed it till I see that wonderful
spread of lights at two o’clock that still night.  re warn’t a sound
re; everybody was asleep.

Every night now I used to slip ashore towards ten o’clock at some little
village,  buy ten or fifteen cents’ worth of meal or bacon or or
stuff to eat;  sometimes I lifted a chicken that warn’t roosting
comfortable,  took him along.  Pap always said, take a chicken when
you get a chance, because if you don’t want him yourself you can easy
find somebody that does,  a good deed ain’t ever forgot.  I never see
pap when he didn’t want  chicken himself, but that is what he used to
say, anyway.

Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields  borrowed a
watermelon, or a mushmelon, or a punkin, or some new corn, or things of
that kind.  Pap always said it warn’t no harm to borrow things if you
was meaning to pay m back some time; but  widow said it warn’t
anything but a soft name for stealing,  no decent body would do it.
 Jim said he reckoned  widow was partly right  pap was partly
right; so  best way would be for us to pick out two or three things
from  list  say we wouldn’t borrow m any more--n he reckoned
it wouldn’t be no harm to borrow  ors.  So we talked it over all
one night, drifting along down  river, trying to make up our minds
wher to drop  watermelons, or  cantelopes, or  mushmelons,
or what.  But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, 
concluded to drop crabapples  p’simmons.  We warn’t feeling just
right before that, but it was all comfortable now.  I was glad  way
it come out, too, because crabapples ain’t ever good,   p’simmons
wouldn’t be ripe for two or three months yet.

We shot a water-fowl now  n that got up too early in  morning
or didn’t go to bed early enough in  evening.  Take it all round, we
lived pretty high.

 fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight, with
a power of thunder  lightning,   rain poured down in a solid
sheet. We stayed in  wigwam  let  raft take care of itself.
When  lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead,
 high, rocky bluffs on both sides.  By  by says I, “Hel-_lo_, Jim,
looky yonder!” It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock.
 We was drifting straight down for her.   lightning showed her very
distinct.  She was leaning over, with part of her upper deck above
water,  you could see every little chimbly-guy clean  clear,  a
chair by  big bell, with an old slouch hat hanging on  back of it,
when  flashes come.

Well, it being away in  night  stormy,  all so mysterious-like,
I felt just  way any or boy would a felt when I see that wreck
laying re so mournful  lonesome in  middle of  river.  I
wanted to get aboard of her  slink around a little,  see what
re was re.  So I says:

“Le’s l on her, Jim.”

But Jim was dead against it at first.  He says:

“I doan’ want to go fool’n ‘long er no wrack.  We’s doin’ blame’ well,
en we better let blame’ well alone, as de good book says.  Like as not
dey’s a watchman on dat wrack.”

“Watchman your grmor,” I says; “re ain’t nothing to watch but
 texas   pilot-house;  do you reckon anybody’s going to resk
his life for a texas  a pilot-house such a night as this, when
it’s likely to break up  wash off down  river any minute?”  Jim
couldn’t say nothing to that, so he didn’t try.  “ besides,” I says,
“we might borrow something worth having out of  captain’s stateroom.
 Seegars, I bet you-- cost five cents apiece, solid cash.  Steamboat
captains is always rich,  get sixty dollars a month,  _y_ don’t
care a cent what a thing costs, you know, long as y want it.  Stick a
cle in your pocket; I can’t rest, Jim, till we give her a rummaging.
 Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing?  Not for pie, he
wouldn’t. He’d call it an adventure--that’s what he’d call it;  he’d
l on that wreck if it was his last act.   wouldn’t he throw style
into it?--wouldn’t he spread himself, nor nothing?  Why, you’d think it
was Christopher C’lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come.  I wish Tom Sawyer
_was_ here.”

Jim he grumbled a little, but give in.  He said we mustn’t talk any more
than we could help,  n talk mighty low.   lightning showed us
 wreck again just in time,  we fetched  stabboard derrick, 
made fast re.

 deck was high out here.  We went sneaking down  slope of it to
labboard, in  dark, towards  texas, feeling our way slow with our
feet,  spreading our hs out to fend off  guys, for it was so
dark we couldn’t see no sign of m.  Pretty soon we struck  forward
end of  skylight,  clumb on to it;   next step fetched us in
front of  captain’s door, which was open,  by Jimminy, away down
through  texas-hall we see a light!  all in  same second we
seem to hear low voices in yonder!

Jim whispered  said he was feeling powerful sick,  told me to come
along.  I says, all right,  was going to start for  raft; but just
n I heard a voice wail out  say:

“Oh, please don’t, boys; I swear I won’t ever tell!”

Anor voice said, pretty loud:

“It’s a lie, Jim Turner.  You’ve acted this way before.  You always want
more’n your share of  truck,  you’ve always got it, too, because
you’ve swore ‘t if you didn’t you’d tell.  But this time you’ve said
it jest one time too many.  You’re  meanest, treacherousest hound in
this country.”

By this time Jim was gone for  raft.  I was just a-biling with
curiosity;  I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn’t back out now,
 so I won’t eir; I’m a-going to see what’s going on here.  So I
dropped on my hs  knees in  little passage,  crept aft
in  dark till re warn’t but one stateroom betwixt me  
cross-hall of  texas.  n in re I see a man stretched on 
floor  tied h  foot,  two men sting over him,  one
of m had a dim lantern in his h,   or one had a pistol.
 This one kept pointing  pistol at  man’s head on  floor, 
saying:

“I’d _like_ to!   I orter, too--a mean skunk!”

 man on  floor would shrivel up  say, “Oh, please don’t, Bill;
I hain’t ever goin’ to tell.”

 every time he said that  man with  lantern would laugh 
say:

“‘Deed you _ain’t!_  You never said no truer thing ‘n that, you bet
you.”  once he said:  “Hear him beg!  yit if we hadn’t got 
best of him  tied him he’d a killed us both.   what _for_?  Jist
for noth’n. Jist because we stood on our _rights_--that’s what for.  But
I lay you ain’t a-goin’ to threaten nobody any more, Jim Turner.  Put
_up_ that pistol, Bill.”

Bill says:

“I don’t want to, Jake Packard.  I’m for killin’ him-- didn’t he kill
old Hatfield jist  same way-- don’t he deserve it?”

“But I don’t _want_ him killed,  I’ve got my reasons for it.”

“Bless yo’ heart for m words, Jake Packard!  I’ll never forgit you
long’s I live!” says  man on  floor, sort of blubbering.

Packard didn’t take no notice of that, but hung up his lantern on a nail
 started towards where I was re in  dark,  motioned Bill
to come.  I crawfished as fast as I could about two yards, but  boat
slanted so that I couldn’t make very good time; so to keep from getting
run over  catched I crawled into a stateroom on  upper side.
  man came a-pawing along in  dark,  when Packard got to my
stateroom, he says:

“Here--come in here.”

 in he come,  Bill after him.  But before y got in I was up
in  upper berth, cornered,  sorry I come.  n y stood re,
with ir hs on  ledge of  berth,  talked.  I couldn’t see
m, but I could tell where y was by  whisky y’d been having.
 I was glad I didn’t drink whisky; but it wouldn’t made much difference
anyway, because most of  time y couldn’t a treed me because I
didn’t brea.  I was too scared.  , besides, a body _couldn’t_
brea  hear such talk.  y talked low  earnest.  Bill wanted
to kill Turner.  He says:

“He’s said he’ll tell,  he will.  If we was to give both our shares
to him _now_ it wouldn’t make no difference after  row   way
we’ve served him.  Shore’s you’re born, he’ll turn State’s evidence; now
you hear _me_.  I’m for putting him out of his troubles.”

“So’m I,” says Packard, very quiet.

“Blame it, I’d sorter begun to think you wasn’t.  Well, n, that’s all
right.  Le’s go  do it.”

“Hold on a minute; I hain’t had my say yit.  You listen to me.
Shooting’s good, but re’s quieter ways if  thing’s _got_ to be
done. But what I say is this:  it ain’t good sense to go court’n around
after a halter if you can git at what you’re up to in some way that’s
jist as good  at  same time don’t bring you into no resks.  Ain’t
that so?”

“You bet it is.  But how you goin’ to manage it this time?”

“Well, my idea is this:  we’ll rustle around  gar up whatever
pickins we’ve overlooked in  staterooms,  shove for shore  hide
 truck. n we’ll wait.  Now I say it ain’t a-goin’ to be more’n two
hours befo’ this wrack breaks up  washes off down  river.  See?
He’ll be drownded,  won’t have nobody to blame for it but his own
self.  I reckon that’s a considerble sight better ‘n killin’ of him.
 I’m unfavorable to killin’ a man as long as you can git aroun’ it; it
ain’t good sense, it ain’t good morals.  Ain’t I right?”

“Yes, I reck’n you are.  But s’pose she _don’t_ break up  wash off?”

“Well, we can wait  two hours anyway  see, can’t we?”

“All right, n; come along.”

So y started,  I lit out, all in a cold sweat,  scrambled
forward. It was dark as pitch re; but I said, in a kind of a coarse
whisper, “Jim!”  he answered up, right at my elbow, with a sort of a
moan,  I says:

“Quick, Jim, it ain’t no time for fooling around  moaning; re’s a
gang of murderers in yonder,  if we don’t hunt up ir boat  set
her drifting down  river so se fellows can’t get away from 
wreck re’s one of ‘em going to be in a bad fix.  But if we find ir
boat we can put _all_ of ‘em in a bad fix--for  sheriff ‘ll get ‘em.
Quick--hurry!  I’ll hunt  labboard side, you hunt  stabboard. You
start at  raft, --”

“Oh, my lordy, lordy!  _raf’_?  Dey ain’ no raf’ no mo’; she done broke
loose en gone I--en here we is!”




CHAPTER XIII.

WELL, I catched my breath  most fainted.  Shut up on a wreck with
such a gang as that!  But it warn’t no time to be sentimentering.  We’d
_got_ to find that boat now--had to have it for ourselves.  So we went
a-quaking  shaking down  stabboard side,  slow work it was,
too--seemed a week before we got to  stern.  No sign of a boat.  Jim
said he didn’t believe he could go any furr--so scared he hadn’t
hardly any strength left, he said.  But I said, come on, if we get left
on this wreck we are in a fix, sure.  So on we prowled again.  We struck
for  stern of  texas,  found it,  n scrabbled along
forwards on  skylight, hanging on from shutter to shutter, for 
edge of  skylight was in  water.  When we got pretty close to 
cross-hall door re was  skiff, sure enough!  I could just barely
see her.  I felt ever so thankful.  In anor second I would a been
aboard of her, but just n  door opened.  One of  men stuck his
head out only about a couple of foot from me,  I thought I was gone;
but he jerked it in again,  says:

“Heave that blame lantern out o’ sight, Bill!”

He flung a bag of something into  boat,  n got in himself 
set down.  It was Packard.  n Bill _he_ come out  got in.  Packard
says, in a low voice:

“All ready--shove off!”

I couldn’t hardly hang on to  shutters, I was so weak.  But Bill
says:

“Hold on--‘d you go through him?”

“No.  Didn’t you?”

“No.  So he’s got his share o’  cash yet.”

“Well, n, come along; no use to take truck  leave money.”

“Say, won’t he suspicion what we’re up to?”

“Maybe he won’t.  But we got to have it anyway. Come along.”

So y got out  went in.

 door slammed to because it was on  careened side;  in a half
second I was in  boat,  Jim come tumbling after me.  I out with my
knife  cut  rope,  away we went!

We didn’t touch an oar,  we didn’t speak nor whisper, nor hardly even
brea.  We went gliding swift along, dead silent, past  tip of 
paddle-box,  past  stern; n in a second or two more we was a
hundred yards below  wreck,   darkness soaked her up, every
last sign of her,  we was safe,  knowed it.

When we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see  lantern
show like a little spark at  texas door for a second,  we knowed
by that that  rascals had missed ir boat,  was beginning to
underst that y was in just as much trouble now as Jim Turner was.

n Jim manned  oars,  we took out after our raft.  Now was 
first time that I begun to worry about  men--I reckon I hadn’t
had time to before.  I begun to think how dreadful it was, even for
murderers, to be in such a fix.  I says to myself, re ain’t no
telling but I might come to be a murderer myself yet,  n how would
I like it?  So says I to Jim:

“ first light we see we’ll l a hundred yards below it or above
it, in a place where it’s a good hiding-place for you   skiff, 
n I’ll go  fix up some kind of a yarn,  get somebody to go for
that gang  get m out of ir scrape, so y can be hung when
ir time comes.”

But that idea was a failure; for pretty soon it begun to storm again,
 this time worse than ever.   rain poured down,  never a light
showed; everybody in bed, I reckon.  We boomed along down  river,
watching for lights  watching for our raft.  After a long time 
rain let up, but  clouds stayed,   lightning kept whimpering,
 by  by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, floating,  we
made for it.

It was  raft,  mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again.  We
seen a light now away down to  right, on shore.  So I said I would
go for it.  skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole
re on  wreck.  We hustled it on to  raft in a pile,  I told
Jim to float along down,  show a light when he judged he had gone
about two mile,  keep it burning till I come; n I manned my oars
 shoved for  light.  As I got down towards it three or four more
showed--up on a hillside.  It was a village.  I closed in above  shore
light,  laid on my oars  floated.  As I went by I see it was a
lantern hanging on  jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat.  I skimmed
around for  watchman, a-wondering whereabouts he slept;  by 
by I found him roosting on  bitts forward, with his head down between
his knees.  I gave his shoulder two or three little shoves,  begun to
cry.

He stirred up in a kind of a startlish way; but when he see it was only
me he took a good gap  stretch,  n he says:

“Hello, what’s up?  Don’t cry, bub.  What’s  trouble?”

I says:

“Pap,  mam,  sis, --”

n I broke down.  He says:

“Oh, dang it now, _don’t_ take on so; we all has to have our troubles,
 this ‘n ‘ll come out all right.  What’s  matter with ‘em?”

“y’re--y’re--are you  watchman of  boat?”

“Yes,” he says, kind of pretty-well-satisfied like.  “I’m  captain
  owner   mate   pilot  watchman  head
deck-h;  sometimes I’m  freight  passengers.  I ain’t as
rich as old Jim Hornback,  I can’t be so blame’ generous  good
to Tom, Dick,  Harry as what he is,  slam around money  way he
does; but I’ve told him a many a time ‘t I wouldn’t trade places with
him; for, says I, a sailor’s life’s  life for me,  I’m derned if
_I’d_ live two mile out o’ town, where re ain’t nothing ever goin’
on, not for all his spondulicks  as much more on top of it.  Says I--”

I broke in  says:

“y’re in an awful peck of trouble, --”

“_Who_ is?”

“Why, pap  mam  sis  Miss Hooker;  if you’d take your
ferryboat  go up re--”

“Up where?  Where are y?”

“On  wreck.”

“What wreck?”

“Why, re ain’t but one.”

“What, you don’t mean  Walter Scott?”

“Yes.”

“Good l! what are y doin’ _re_, for gracious sakes?”

“Well, y didn’t go re a-purpose.”

“I bet y didn’t!  Why, great goodness, re ain’t no chance for ‘em
if y don’t git off mighty quick!  Why, how in  nation did y
ever git into such a scrape?”

“Easy enough.  Miss Hooker was a-visiting up re to  town--”

“Yes, Booth’s Ling--go on.”

“She was a-visiting re at Booth’s Ling,  just in  edge of
 evening she started over with her nigger woman in  horse-ferry
to stay all night at her friend’s house, Miss What-you-may-call-her I
disremember her name-- y lost ir steering-oar,  swung
around  went a-floating down, stern first, about two mile, 
saddle-baggsed on  wreck,   ferryman   nigger woman 
 horses was all lost, but Miss Hooker she made a grab  got aboard
 wreck.  Well, about an hour after dark we come along down in our
trading-scow,  it was so dark we didn’t notice  wreck till we was
right on it;  so _we_ saddle-baggsed; but all of us was saved but
Bill Whipple-- oh, he _was_  best cretur!--I most wish ‘t it had
been me, I do.”

“My George!  It’s  beatenest thing I ever struck.   _n_ what
did you all do?”

“Well, we hollered  took on, but it’s so wide re we couldn’t
make nobody hear.  So pap said somebody got to get ashore  get help
somehow. I was  only one that could swim, so I made a dash for it,
 Miss Hooker she said if I didn’t strike help sooner, come here 
hunt up her uncle,  he’d fix  thing.  I made  l about a mile
below,  been fooling along ever since, trying to get people to do
something, but y said, ‘What, in such a night  such a current?
re ain’t no sense in it; go for  steam ferry.’  Now if you’ll go
--”

“By Jackson, I’d _like_ to, , blame it, I don’t know but I will; but
who in  dingnation’s a-going’ to _pay_ for it?  Do you reckon your
pap--”

“Why _that’s_ all right.  Miss Hooker she tole me, _particular_, that
her uncle Hornback--”

“Great guns! is _he_ her uncle?  Looky here, you break for that light
over yonder-way,  turn out west when you git re,  about a
quarter of a mile out you’ll come to  tavern; tell ‘em to dart you
out to Jim Hornback’s,  he’ll foot  bill.   don’t you fool
around any, because he’ll want to know  news.  Tell him I’ll have
his niece all safe before he can get to town.  Hump yourself, now; I’m
a-going up around  corner here to roust out my engineer.”

I struck for  light, but as soon as he turned  corner I went back
 got into my skiff  bailed her out,  n pulled up shore in
 easy water about six hundred yards,  tucked myself in among
some woodboats; for I couldn’t rest easy till I could see  ferryboat
start. But take it all around, I was feeling rur comfortable on
accounts of taking all this trouble for that gang, for not many would
a done it.  I wished  widow knowed about it.  I judged she would be
proud of me for helping se rapscallions, because rapscallions 
dead beats is  kind  widow  good people takes  most interest
in.

Well, before long here comes  wreck, dim  dusky, sliding along
down! A kind of cold shiver went through me,  n I struck out for
her.  She was very deep,  I see in a minute re warn’t much chance
for anybody being alive in her.  I pulled all around her  hollered
a little, but re wasn’t any answer; all dead still.  I felt a little
bit heavy-hearted about  gang, but not much, for I reckoned if y
could st it I could.

n here comes  ferryboat; so I shoved for  middle of  river
on a long down-stream slant;  when I judged I was out of eye-reach
I laid on my oars,  looked back  see her go  smell around 
wreck for Miss Hooker’s remainders, because  captain would know her
uncle Hornback would want m;  n pretty soon  ferryboat give
it up  went for  shore,  I laid into my work  went a-booming
down  river.

It did seem a powerful long time before Jim’s light showed up;  when
it did show it looked like it was a thous mile off.  By  time I
got re  sky was beginning to get a little gray in  east; so we
struck for an isl,  hid  raft,  sunk  skiff,  turned
in  slept like dead people.




CHAPTER XIV.

BY  by, when we got up, we turned over  truck  gang had stole
off of  wreck,  found boots,  blankets,  clos,  all
sorts of or things,  a lot of books,  a spyglass,  three
boxes of seegars.  We hadn’t ever been this rich before in neir of
our lives.   seegars was prime.  We laid off all  afternoon in 
woods talking,  me reading  books,  having a general good
time. I told Jim all about what happened inside  wreck  at 
ferryboat,  I said se kinds of things was adventures; but he said
he didn’t want no more adventures.  He said that when I went in 
texas  he crawled back to get on  raft  found her gone he
nearly died, because he judged it was all up with _him_ anyway it could
be fixed; for if he didn’t get saved he would get drownded;  if he
did get saved, whoever saved him would send him back home so as to get
 reward,  n Miss Watson would sell him South, sure.  Well, he
was right; he was most always right; he had an uncommon level head for a
nigger.

I read considerable to Jim about kings  dukes  earls  such, 
how gaudy y dressed,  how much style y put on,  called each
or your majesty,  your grace,  your lordship,  so on, ‘stead
of mister;  Jim’s eyes bugged out,  he was interested.  He says:

“I didn’ know dey was so many un um.  I hain’t hearn ‘bout none un um,
skasely, but ole King Sollermun, onless you counts dem kings dat’s in a
pack er k’yards.  How much do a king git?”

“Get?”  I says; “why, y get a thous dollars a month if y want
it; y can have just as much as y want; everything belongs to
m.”

“_Ain’_ dat gay?  En what dey got to do, Huck?”

“_y_ don’t do nothing!  Why, how you talk! y just set around.”

“No; is dat so?”

“Of course it is.  y just set around--except, maybe, when re’s a
war; n y go to  war.  But or times y just lazy around; or
go hawking--just hawking  sp--Sh!--d’ you hear a noise?”

We skipped out  looked; but it warn’t nothing but  flutter of a
steamboat’s wheel away down, coming around  point; so we come back.

“Yes,” says I, “ or times, when things is dull, y fuss with 
parlyment;  if everybody don’t go just so he whacks ir heads off.
But mostly y hang round  harem.”

“Roun’ de which?”

“Harem.”

“What’s de harem?”

“ place where he keeps his wives.  Don’t you know about  harem?
Solomon had one; he had about a million wives.”

“Why, yes, dat’s so; I--I’d done forgot it.  A harem’s a bo’d’n-house, I
reck’n.  Mos’ likely dey has rackety times in de nussery.  En I reck’n
de wives quarrels considable; en dat ‘crease de racket.  Yit dey say
Sollermun de wises’ man dat ever live’.  I doan’ take no stock in
dat. Bekase why: would a wise man want to live in de mids’ er sich a
blim-blammin’ all de time?  No--‘deed he wouldn’t.  A wise man ‘ud take
en buil’ a biler-factry; en den he could shet _down_ de biler-factry
when he want to res’.”

“Well, but he _was_  wisest man, anyway; because  widow she told
me so, her own self.”

“I doan k’yer what de widder say, he _warn’t_ no wise man nur.  He
had some er de dad-fetchedes’ ways I ever see.  Does you know ‘bout dat
chile dat he ‘uz gwyne to chop in two?”

“Yes,  widow told me all about it.”

“_Well_, den!  Warn’ dat de beatenes’ notion in de worl’?  You jes’
take en look at it a minute.  Dah’s de stump, dah--dat’s one er de women;
heah’s you--dat’s de yur one; I’s Sollermun; en dish yer dollar bill’s
de chile.  Bofe un you claims it.  What does I do?  Does I shin aroun’
mongs’ de neighbors en fine out which un you de bill _do_ b’long to, en
han’ it over to de right one, all safe en soun’, de way dat anybody dat
had any gumption would?  No; I take en whack de bill in _two_, en give
half un it to you, en de yur half to de yur woman.  Dat’s de way
Sollermun was gwyne to do wid de chile.  Now I want to ast you:  what’s
de use er dat half a bill?--can’t buy noth’n wid it.  En what use is a
half a chile?  I wouldn’ give a dern for a million un um.”

“But hang it, Jim, you’ve clean missed  point--blame it, you’ve missed
it a thous mile.”

“Who?  Me?  Go ‘long.  Doan’ talk to me ‘bout yo’ pints.  I reck’n I
knows sense when I sees it; en dey ain’ no sense in sich doin’s as
dat. De ‘spute warn’t ‘bout a half a chile, de ‘spute was ‘bout a whole
chile; en de man dat think he kin settle a ‘spute ‘bout a whole chile
wid a half a chile doan’ know enough to come in out’n de rain.  Doan’
talk to me ‘bout Sollermun, Huck, I knows him by de back.”

“But I tell you you don’t get  point.”

“Blame de point!  I reck’n I knows what I knows.  En mine you, de _real_
pint is down furder--it’s down deeper.  It lays in de way Sollermun was
raised.  You take a man dat’s got on’y one or two chillen; is dat man
gwyne to be waseful o’ chillen?  No, he ain’t; he can’t ‘ford it.  _He_
know how to value ‘em.  But you take a man dat’s got ‘bout five million
chillen runnin’ roun’ de house, en it’s diffunt.  _He_ as soon chop a
chile in two as a cat. Dey’s plenty mo’.  A chile er two, mo’ er less,
warn’t no consekens to Sollermun, dad fatch him!”

I never see such a nigger.  If he got a notion in his head once, re
warn’t no getting it out again.  He was  most down on Solomon of
any nigger I ever see.  So I went to talking about or kings,  let
Solomon slide.  I told about Louis Sixteenth that got his head cut off
in France long time ago;  about his little boy  dolphin, that
would a been a king, but y took  shut him up in jail,  some say
he died re.

“Po’ little chap.”

“But some says he got out  got away,  come to America.”

“Dat’s good!  But he’ll be pooty lonesome--dey ain’ no kings here, is
dey, Huck?”

“No.”

“Den he cain’t git no situation.  What he gwyne to do?”

“Well, I don’t know.  Some of m gets on  police,  some of m
learns people how to talk French.”

“Why, Huck, doan’ de French people talk de same way we does?”

“_No_, Jim; you couldn’t underst a word y said--not a single word.”

“Well, now, I be ding-busted!  How do dat come?”

“I don’t know; but it’s so.  I got some of ir jabber out of a book.
S’pose a man was to come to you  say Polly-voo-franzy--what would you
think?”

“I wouldn’ think nuff’n; I’d take en bust him over de head--dat is, if he
warn’t white.  I wouldn’t ‘low no nigger to call me dat.”

“Shucks, it ain’t calling you anything.  It’s only saying, do you know
how to talk French?”

“Well, den, why couldn’t he _say_ it?”

“Why, he _is_ a-saying it.  That’s a Frenchman’s _way_ of saying it.”

“Well, it’s a blame ridicklous way, en I doan’ want to hear no mo’ ‘bout
it.  Dey ain’ no sense in it.”

“Looky here, Jim; does a cat talk like we do?”

“No, a cat don’t.”

“Well, does a cow?”

“No, a cow don’t, nur.”

“Does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat?”

“No, dey don’t.”

“It’s natural  right for ‘em to talk different from each or, ain’t
it?”

“Course.”

“ ain’t it natural  right for a cat  a cow to talk different
from _us_?”

“Why, mos’ sholy it is.”

“Well, n, why ain’t it natural  right for a _Frenchman_ to talk
different from us?  You answer me that.”

“Is a cat a man, Huck?”

“No.”

“Well, den, dey ain’t no sense in a cat talkin’ like a man.  Is a cow a
man?--er is a cow a cat?”

“No, she ain’t eir of m.”

“Well, den, she ain’t got no business to talk like eir one er 
yur of ‘em.  Is a Frenchman a man?”

“Yes.”

“_Well_, den!  Dad blame it, why doan’ he _talk_ like a man?  You answer
me _dat_!”

I see it warn’t no use wasting words--you can’t learn a nigger to argue.
So I quit.




CHAPTER XV.

WE judged that three nights more would fetch us to Cairo, at  bottom
of Illinois, where  Ohio River comes in,  that was what we was
after.  We would sell  raft  get on a steamboat  go way up 
Ohio amongst  free States,  n be out of trouble.

Well,  second night a fog begun to come on,  we made for a towhead
to tie to, for it wouldn’t do to try to run in a fog; but when I paddled
ahead in  canoe, with  line to make fast, re warn’t anything
but little saplings to tie to.  I passed  line around one of m
right on  edge of  cut bank, but re was a stiff current, 
 raft come booming down so lively she tore it out by  roots 
away she went.  I see  fog closing down,  it made me so sick 
scared I couldn’t budge for most a half a minute it seemed to me--
n re warn’t no raft in sight; you couldn’t see twenty yards.  I
jumped into  canoe  run back to  stern,  grabbed  paddle
 set her back a stroke.  But she didn’t come.  I was in such a hurry
I hadn’t untied her.  I got up  tried to untie her, but I was so
excited my hs shook so I couldn’t hardly do anything with m.

As soon as I got started I took out after  raft, hot  heavy, right
down  towhead.  That was all right as far as it went, but  towhead
warn’t sixty yards long,   minute I flew by  foot of it I shot
out into  solid white fog,  hadn’t no more idea which way I was
going than a dead man.

Thinks I, it won’t do to paddle; first I know I’ll run into  bank
or a towhead or something; I got to set still  float,  yet it’s
mighty fidgety business to have to hold your hs still at such a time.
 I whooped  listened.  Away down re somewheres I hears a small
whoop,  up comes my spirits.  I went tearing after it, listening
sharp to hear it again.   next time it come I see I warn’t heading
for it, but heading away to  right of it.    next time I was
heading away to  left of it-- not gaining on it much eir, for
I was flying around, this way  that  t’or, but it was going
straight ahead all  time.

I did wish  fool would think to beat a tin pan,  beat it all 
time, but he never did,  it was  still places between  whoops
that was making  trouble for me.  Well, I fought along,  directly
I hears  whoop _behind_ me.  I was tangled good now.  That was
somebody else’s whoop, or else I was turned around.

I throwed  paddle down.  I heard  whoop again; it was behind me
yet, but in a different place; it kept coming,  kept changing its
place,  I kept answering, till by  by it was in front of me again,
 I knowed  current had swung  canoe’s head down-stream,  I
was all right if that was Jim  not some or raftsman hollering.
 I couldn’t tell nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing don’t look
natural nor sound natural in a fog.

 whooping went on,  in about a minute I come a-booming down on a
cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it,   current throwed
me off to  left  shot by, amongst a lot of snags that fairly
roared,  currrent was tearing by m so swift.

In anor second or two it was solid white  still again.  I set
perfectly still n, listening to my heart thump,  I reckon I didn’t
draw a breath while it thumped a hundred.

I just give up n.  I knowed what  matter was.  That cut bank
was an isl,  Jim had gone down t’or side of it.  It warn’t no
towhead that you could float by in ten minutes.  It had  big timber
of a regular isl; it might be five or six miles long  more than
half a mile wide.

I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, I reckon.  I
was floating along, of course, four or five miles an hour; but you don’t
ever think of that.  No, you _feel_ like you are laying dead still on
 water;  if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you don’t think to
yourself how fast _you’re_ going, but you catch your breath  think,
my! how that snag’s tearing along.  If you think it ain’t dismal 
lonesome out in a fog that way by yourself in  night, you try it
once--you’ll see.

Next, for about a half an hour, I whoops now  n; at last I hears
 answer a long ways off,  tries to follow it, but I couldn’t do
it,  directly I judged I’d got into a nest of towheads, for I had
little dim glimpses of m on both sides of me--sometimes just a narrow
channel between,  some that I couldn’t see I knowed was re because
I’d hear  wash of  current against  old dead brush  trash
that hung over  banks.  Well, I warn’t long loosing  whoops down
amongst  towheads;  I only tried to chase m a little while,
anyway, because it was worse than chasing a Jack-o’-lantern.  You never
knowed a sound dodge around so,  swap places so quick  so much.

I had to claw away from  bank pretty lively four or five times, to
keep from knocking  isls out of  river;  so I judged 
raft must be butting into  bank every now  n, or else it would
get furr ahead  clear out of hearing--it was floating a little
faster than what I was.

Well, I seemed to be in  open river again by  by, but I couldn’t
hear no sign of a whoop nowheres.  I reckoned Jim had fetched up on a
snag, maybe,  it was all up with him.  I was good  tired, so I
laid down in  canoe  said I wouldn’t bor no more.  I didn’t
want to go to sleep, of course; but I was so sleepy I couldn’t help it;
so I thought I would take jest one little cat-nap.

But I reckon it was more than a cat-nap, for when I waked up  stars
was shining bright,  fog was all gone,  I was spinning down a
big bend stern first.  First I didn’t know where I was; I thought I was
dreaming;  when things began to come back to me y seemed to come
up dim out of last week.

It was a monstrous big river here, with  tallest   thickest
kind of timber on both banks; just a solid wall, as well as I could see
by  stars.  I looked away down-stream,  seen a black speck on 
water. I took after it; but when I got to it it warn’t nothing but a
couple of sawlogs made fast toger.  n I see anor speck, 
chased that; n anor,  this time I was right.  It was  raft.

When I got to it Jim was setting re with his head down between his
knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over  steering-oar.  
or oar was smashed off,   raft was littered up with leaves 
branches  dirt.  So she’d had a rough time.

I made fast  laid down under Jim’s nose on  raft,  began to
gap,  stretch my fists out against Jim,  says:

“Hello, Jim, have I been asleep?  Why didn’t you stir me up?”

“Goodness gracious, is dat you, Huck?  En you ain’ dead--you ain’
drownded--you’s back agin?  It’s too good for true, honey, it’s too good
for true. Lemme look at you chile, lemme feel o’ you.  No, you ain’
dead! you’s back agin, ‘live en soun’, jis de same ole Huck--de same ole
Huck, thanks to goodness!”

“What’s  matter with you, Jim?  You been a-drinking?”

“Drinkin’?  Has I ben a-drinkin’?  Has I had a chance to be a-drinkin’?”

“Well, n, what makes you talk so wild?”

“How does I talk wild?”

“_How_?  Why, hain’t you been talking about my coming back,  all that
stuff, as if I’d been gone away?”

“Huck--Huck Finn, you look me in de eye; look me in de eye.  _Hain’t_ you
ben gone away?”

“Gone away?  Why, what in  nation do you mean?  I hain’t been gone
anywheres.  Where would I go to?”

“Well, looky here, boss, dey’s sumf’n wrong, dey is.  Is I _me_, or who
_is_ I? Is I heah, or whah _is_ I?  Now dat’s what I wants to know.”

“Well, I think you’re here, plain enough, but I think you’re a
tangle-headed old fool, Jim.”

“I is, is I?  Well, you answer me dis:  Didn’t you tote out de line in
de canoe fer to make fas’ to de tow-head?”

“No, I didn’t.  What tow-head?  I hain’t see no tow-head.”

“You hain’t seen no towhead?  Looky here, didn’t de line pull loose en
de raf’ go a-hummin’ down de river, en leave you en de canoe behine in
de fog?”

“What fog?”

“Why, de fog!--de fog dat’s been aroun’ all night.  En didn’t you whoop,
en didn’t I whoop, tell we got mix’ up in de isls en one un us got
los’ en t’or one was jis’ as good as los’, ‘kase he didn’ know whah
he wuz? En didn’t I bust up agin a lot er dem isls en have a turrible
time en mos’ git drownded?  Now ain’ dat so, boss--ain’t it so?  You
answer me dat.”

“Well, this is too many for me, Jim.  I hain’t seen no fog, nor no
isls, nor no troubles, nor nothing.  I been setting here talking with
you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago,  I reckon
I done  same.  You couldn’t a got drunk in that time, so of course
you’ve been dreaming.”

“Dad fetch it, how is I gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes?”

“Well, hang it all, you did dream it, because re didn’t any of it
happen.”

“But, Huck, it’s all jis’ as plain to me as--”

“It don’t make no difference how plain it is; re ain’t nothing in it.
I know, because I’ve been here all  time.”

Jim didn’t say nothing for about five minutes, but set re studying
over it.  n he says:

“Well, den, I reck’n I did dream it, Huck; but dog my cats ef it ain’t
de powerfullest dream I ever see.  En I hain’t ever had no dream b’fo’
dat’s tired me like dis one.”

“Oh, well, that’s all right, because a dream does tire a body like
everything sometimes.  But this one was a staving dream; tell me all
about it, Jim.”

So Jim went to work  told me  whole thing right through, just as
it happened, only he painted it up considerable.  n he said he must
start in  “‘terpret” it, because it was sent for a warning.  He said
 first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good, but
 current was anor man that would get us away from him.   whoops
was warnings that would come to us every now  n,  if we didn’t
try hard to make out to underst m y’d just take us into bad
luck, ‘stead of keeping us out of it.   lot of towheads was troubles
we was going to get into with quarrelsome people  all kinds of mean
folks, but if we minded our business  didn’t talk back  aggravate
m, we would pull through  get out of  fog  into  big
clear river, which was  free States,  wouldn’t have no more
trouble.

It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got on to  raft, but it
was clearing up again now.

“Oh, well, that’s all interpreted well enough as far as it goes, Jim,” I
says; “but what does _se_ things st for?”

It was  leaves  rubbish on  raft   smashed oar.  You
could see m first-rate now.

Jim looked at  trash,  n looked at me,  back at  trash
again.  He had got  dream fixed so strong in his head that he
couldn’t seem to shake it loose  get  facts back into its place
again right away.  But when he did get  thing straightened around he
looked at me steady without ever smiling,  says:

“What do dey stan’ for?  I’se gwyne to tell you.  When I got all wore
out wid work, en wid de callin’ for you, en went to sleep, my heart wuz
mos’ broke bekase you wuz los’, en I didn’ k’yer no’ mo’ what become
er me en de raf’.  En when I wake up en fine you back agin, all safe
en soun’, de tears come, en I could a got down on my knees en kiss yo’
foot, I’s so thankful. En all you wuz thinkin’ ‘bout wuz how you could
make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie.  Dat truck dah is _trash_; en trash
is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren’s en makes ‘em
ashamed.”

n he got up slow  walked to  wigwam,  went in re without
saying anything but that.  But that was enough.  It made me feel so mean
I could almost kissed _his_ foot to get him to take it back.

It was fifteen minutes before I could work myself up to go  humble
myself to a nigger; but I done it,  I warn’t ever sorry for it
afterwards, neir.  I didn’t do him no more mean tricks,  I
wouldn’t done that one if I’d a knowed it would make him feel that way.




CHAPTER XVI.

WE slept most all day,  started out at night, a little ways behind a
monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a procession.  She had
four long sweeps at each end, so we judged she carried as many as thirty
men, likely.  She had five big wigwams aboard, wide apart,  an open
camp fire in  middle,  a tall flag-pole at each end.  re was a
power of style about her.  It _amounted_ to something being a raftsman
on such a craft as that.

We went drifting down into a big bend,   night clouded up  got
hot.   river was very wide,  was walled with solid timber on
both sides; you couldn’t see a break in it hardly ever, or a light.  We
talked about Cairo,  wondered wher we would know it when we got to
it.  I said likely we wouldn’t, because I had heard say re warn’t but
about a dozen houses re,  if y didn’t happen to have m lit
up, how was we going to know we was passing a town?  Jim said if  two
big rivers joined toger re, that would show.  But I said maybe
we might think we was passing  foot of an isl  coming into 
same old river again. That disturbed Jim-- me too.  So  question
was, what to do?  I said, paddle ashore  first time a light showed,
 tell m pap was behind, coming along with a trading-scow, 
was a green h at  business,  wanted to know how far it was to
Cairo.  Jim thought it was a good idea, so we took a smoke on it 
waited.

re warn’t nothing to do now but to look out sharp for  town, 
not pass it without seeing it.  He said he’d be mighty sure to see it,
because he’d be a free man  minute he seen it, but if he missed it
he’d be in a slave country again  no more show for freedom.  Every
little while he jumps up  says:

“Dah she is?”

But it warn’t.  It was Jack-o’-lanterns, or lightning bugs; so he set
down again,  went to watching, same as before.  Jim said it made him
all over trembly  feverish to be so close to freedom.  Well, I can
tell you it made me all over trembly  feverish, too, to hear him,
because I begun to get it through my head that he _was_ most free--
who was to blame for it?  Why, _me_.  I couldn’t get that out of my
conscience, no how nor no way. It got to troubling me so I couldn’t
rest; I couldn’t stay still in one place.  It hadn’t ever come home to
me before, what this thing was that I was doing.  But now it did;  it
stayed with me,  scorched me more  more.  I tried to make out to
myself that I warn’t to blame, because I didn’t run Jim off from his
rightful owner; but it warn’t no use, conscience up  says, every
time, “But you knowed he was running for his freedom,  you could a
paddled ashore  told somebody.”  That was so--I couldn’t get around
that noway.  That was where it pinched.  Conscience says to me, “What
had poor Miss Watson done to you that you could see her nigger go off
right under your eyes  never say one single word?  What did that poor
old woman do to you that you could treat her so mean?  Why, she tried to
learn you your book, she tried to learn you your manners, she tried to
be good to you every way she knowed how.  _That’s_ what she done.”

I got to feeling so mean  so miserable I most wished I was dead.  I
fidgeted up  down  raft, abusing myself to myself,  Jim was
fidgeting up  down past me.  We neir of us could keep still.
 Every time he danced around  says, “Dah’s Cairo!” it went through me
like a shot,  I thought if it _was_ Cairo I reckoned I would die of
miserableness.

Jim talked out loud all  time while I was talking to myself.  He was
saying how  first thing he would do when he got to a free State he
would go to saving up money  never spend a single cent,  when he
got enough he would buy his wife, which was owned on a farm close to
where Miss Watson lived;  n y would both work to buy 
two children,  if ir master wouldn’t sell m, y’d get an
Ab’litionist to go  steal m.

It most froze me to hear such talk.  He wouldn’t ever dared to talk such
talk in his life before.  Just see what a difference it made in him 
minute he judged he was about free.  It was according to  old saying,
“Give a nigger an inch  he’ll take an ell.”  Thinks I, this is what
comes of my not thinking.  Here was this nigger, which I had as good
as helped to run away, coming right out flat-footed  saying he would
steal his children--children that belonged to a man I didn’t even know; a
man that hadn’t ever done me no harm.

I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was such a lowering of him.  My
conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever, until at last I says
to it, “Let up on me--it ain’t too late yet--I’ll paddle ashore at 
first light  tell.”  I felt easy  happy  light as a fear
right off.  All my troubles was gone.  I went to looking out sharp for a
light,  sort of singing to myself.  By  by one showed.  Jim sings
out:

“We’s safe, Huck, we’s safe!  Jump up  crack yo’ heels!  Dat’s de
good ole Cairo at las’, I jis knows it!”

I says:

“I’ll take  canoe  go  see, Jim.  It mightn’t be, you know.”

He jumped  got  canoe ready,  put his old coat in  bottom
for me to set on,  give me  paddle;  as I shoved off, he says:

“Pooty soon I’ll be a-shout’n’ for joy, en I’ll say, it’s all on
accounts o’ Huck; I’s a free man, en I couldn’t ever ben free ef it
hadn’ ben for Huck; Huck done it.  Jim won’t ever forgit you, Huck;
you’s de bes’ fren’ Jim’s ever had; en you’s de _only_ fren’ ole Jim’s
got now.”

I was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him; but when he says
this, it seemed to kind of take  tuck all out of me.  I went along
slow n,  I warn’t right down certain wher I was glad I started
or wher I warn’t.  When I was fifty yards off, Jim says:

“Dah you goes, de ole true Huck; de on’y white genlman dat ever kep’ his
promise to ole Jim.”

Well, I just felt sick.  But I says, I _got_ to do it--I can’t get _out_
of it.  Right n along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns, 
y stopped  I stopped.  One of m says:

“What’s that yonder?”

“A piece of a raft,” I says.

“Do you belong on it?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Any men on it?”

“Only one, sir.”

“Well, re’s five niggers run off to-night up yonder, above  head
of  bend.  Is your man white or black?”

I didn’t answer up prompt.  I tried to, but  words wouldn’t come. I
tried for a second or two to brace up  out with it, but I warn’t man
enough--hadn’t  spunk of a rabbit.  I see I was weakening; so I just
give up trying,  up  says:

“He’s white.”

“I reckon we’ll go  see for ourselves.”

“I wish you would,” says I, “because it’s pap that’s re,  maybe
you’d help me tow  raft ashore where  light is.  He’s sick-- so
is mam  Mary Ann.”

“Oh,  devil! we’re in a hurry, boy.  But I s’pose we’ve got to.
 Come, buckle to your paddle,  let’s get along.”

I buckled to my paddle  y laid to ir oars.  When we had made a
stroke or two, I says:

“Pap’ll be mighty much obleeged to you, I can tell you.  Everybody goes
away when I want m to help me tow  raft ashore,  I can’t do it
by myself.”

“Well, that’s infernal mean.  Odd, too.  Say, boy, what’s  matter
with your far?”

“It’s --a----well, it ain’t anything much.”

y stopped pulling.  It warn’t but a mighty little ways to  raft
now. One says:

“Boy, that’s a lie.  What _is_  matter with your pap?  Answer up
square now,  it’ll be  better for you.”

“I will, sir, I will, honest--but don’t leave us, please.  It’s
----Gentlemen, if you’ll only pull ahead,  let me heave you 
headline, you won’t have to come a-near  raft--please do.”

“Set her back, John, set her back!” says one.  y backed water.  “Keep
away, boy--keep to looard.  Confound it, I just expect  wind has
blowed it to us.  Your pap’s got  small-pox,  you know it precious
well.  Why didn’t you come out  say so?  Do you want to spread it all
over?”

“Well,” says I, a-blubbering, “I’ve told everybody before,  y just
went away  left us.”

“Poor devil, re’s something in that.  We are right down sorry for
you, but we--well, hang it, we don’t want  small-pox, you see.  Look
here, I’ll tell you what to do.  Don’t you try to l by yourself, or
you’ll smash everything to pieces.  You float along down about twenty
miles,  you’ll come to a town on  left-h side of  river.  It
will be long after sun-up n,  when you ask for help you tell m
your folks are all down with chills  fever.  Don’t be a fool again,
 let people guess what is  matter.  Now we’re trying to do you a
kindness; so you just put twenty miles between us, that’s a good boy.
 It wouldn’t do any good to l yonder where  light is--it’s only a
wood-yard. Say, I reckon your far’s poor,  I’m bound to say he’s
in pretty hard luck.  Here, I’ll put a twenty-dollar gold piece on this
board,  you get it when it floats by.  I feel mighty mean to leave
you; but my kingdom! it won’t do to fool with small-pox, don’t you see?”

“Hold on, Parker,” says  or man, “here’s a twenty to put on 
board for me.  Good-bye, boy; you do as Mr. Parker told you,  you’ll
be all right.”

“That’s so, my boy--good-bye, good-bye.  If you see any runaway niggers
you get help  nab m,  you can make some money by it.”

“Good-bye, sir,” says I; “I won’t let no runaway niggers get by me if I
can help it.”

y went off  I got aboard  raft, feeling bad  low, because I
knowed very well I had done wrong,  I see it warn’t no use for me
to try to learn to do right; a body that don’t get _started_ right when
he’s little ain’t got no show--when  pinch comes re ain’t nothing
to back him up  keep him to his work,  so he gets beat.  n I
thought a minute,  says to myself, hold on; s’pose you’d a done right
 give Jim up, would you felt better than what you do now?  No, says
I, I’d feel bad--I’d feel just  same way I do now.  Well, n, says
I, what’s  use you learning to do right when it’s troublesome to do
right  ain’t no trouble to do wrong,   wages is just  same?
 I was stuck.  I couldn’t answer that.  So I reckoned I wouldn’t bor
no more about it, but after this always do whichever come hiest at
 time.

I went into  wigwam; Jim warn’t re.  I looked all around; he
warn’t anywhere.  I says:

“Jim!”

“Here I is, Huck.  Is dey out o’ sight yit?  Don’t talk loud.”

He was in  river under  stern oar, with just his nose out.  I told
him y were out of sight, so he come aboard.  He says:

“I was a-listenin’ to all de talk, en I slips into de river en was gwyne
to shove for sho’ if dey come aboard.  Den I was gwyne to swim to de
raf’ agin when dey was gone.  But lawsy, how you did fool ‘em, Huck!
 Dat _wuz_ de smartes’ dodge!  I tell you, chile, I’spec it save’ ole
Jim--ole Jim ain’t going to forgit you for dat, honey.”

n we talked about  money.  It was a pretty good raise--twenty
dollars apiece.  Jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat
now,   money would last us as far as we wanted to go in  free
States. He said twenty mile more warn’t far for  raft to go, but he
wished we was already re.

Towards daybreak we tied up,  Jim was mighty particular about hiding
 raft good.  n he worked all day fixing things in bundles, 
getting all ready to quit rafting.

That night about ten we hove in sight of  lights of a town away down
in a left-h bend.

I went off in  canoe to ask about it.  Pretty soon I found a man out
in  river with a skiff, setting a trot-line.  I ranged up  says:

“Mister, is that town Cairo?”

“Cairo? no.  You must be a blame’ fool.”

“What town is it, mister?”

“If you want to know, go  find out.  If you stay here borin’
around me for about a half a minute longer you’ll get something you
won’t want.”

I paddled to  raft.  Jim was awful disappointed, but I said never
mind, Cairo would be  next place, I reckoned.

We passed anor town before daylight,  I was going out again; but
it was high ground, so I didn’t go.  No high ground about Cairo, Jim
said. I had forgot it.  We laid up for  day on a towhead tolerable
close to  left-h bank.  I begun to suspicion something.  So did
Jim.  I says:

“Maybe we went by Cairo in  fog that night.”

He says:

“Doan’ le’s talk about it, Huck.  Po’ niggers can’t have no luck.  I
awluz ‘spected dat rattlesnake-skin warn’t done wid its work.”

“I wish I’d never seen that snake-skin, Jim--I do wish I’d never laid
eyes on it.”

“It ain’t yo’ fault, Huck; you didn’ know.  Don’t you blame yo’self
‘bout it.”

When it was daylight, here was  clear Ohio water inshore, sure
enough,  outside was  old regular Muddy!  So it was all up with
Cairo.

We talked it all over.  It wouldn’t do to take to  shore; we couldn’t
take  raft up  stream, of course.  re warn’t no way but to wait
for dark,  start back in  canoe  take  chances.  So we slept
all day amongst  cottonwood thicket, so as to be fresh for  work,
 when we went back to  raft about dark  canoe was gone!

We didn’t say a word for a good while.  re warn’t anything to
say.  We both knowed well enough it was some more work of 
rattlesnake-skin; so what was  use to talk about it?  It would only
look like we was finding fault,  that would be bound to fetch more
bad luck-- keep on fetching it, too, till we knowed enough to keep
still.

By  by we talked about what we better do,  found re warn’t no
way but just to go along down with  raft till we got a chance to buy
a canoe to go back in.  We warn’t going to borrow it when re warn’t
anybody around,  way pap would do, for that might set people after
us.

So we shoved out after dark on  raft.

Anybody that don’t believe yet that it’s foolishness to hle a
snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us, will believe it
now if y read on  see what more it done for us.

 place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore.  But we
didn’t see no rafts laying up; so we went along during three hours 
more.  Well,  night got gray  rur thick, which is  next
meanest thing to fog.  You can’t tell  shape of  river,  you
can’t see no distance. It got to be very late  still,  n along
comes a steamboat up  river.  We lit  lantern,  judged she
would see it.  Up-stream boats didn’t generly come close to us; y
go out  follow  bars  hunt for easy water under  reefs; but
nights like this y bull right up  channel against  whole river.

We could hear her pounding along, but we didn’t see her good till she
was close.  She aimed right for us.  Often y do that  try to see
how close y can come without touching; sometimes  wheel bites off
a sweep,  n  pilot sticks his head out  laughs,  thinks
he’s mighty smart.  Well, here she comes,  we said she was going to
try  shave us; but she didn’t seem to be sheering off a bit.  She
was a big one,  she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black
cloud with rows of glow-worms around it; but all of a sudden she bulged
out, big  scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining
like red-hot teeth,  her monstrous bows  guards hanging right
over us.  re was a yell at us,  a jingling of bells to stop 
engines, a powwow of cussing,  whistling of steam-- as Jim went
overboard on one side  I on  or, she come smashing straight
through  raft.

I dived-- I aimed to find  bottom, too, for a thirty-foot wheel
had got to go over me,  I wanted it to have plenty of room.  I could
always stay under water a minute; this time I reckon I stayed under a
minute  a half.  n I bounced for  top in a hurry, for I was
nearly busting.  I popped out to my armpits  blowed  water out of
my nose,  puffed a bit.  Of course re was a booming current; 
of course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she
stopped m, for y never cared much for raftsmen; so now she was
churning along up  river, out of sight in  thick wear, though I
could hear her.

I sung out for Jim about a dozen times, but I didn’t get any answer;
so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was “treading water,” 
struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of me.  But I made out to see
that  drift of  current was towards  left-h shore, which
meant that I was in a crossing; so I changed off  went that way.

It was one of se long, slanting, two-mile crossings; so I was a good
long time in getting over.  I made a safe ling,  clumb up 
bank. I couldn’t see but a little ways, but I went poking along over
rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more,  n I run across a
big old-fashioned double log-house before I noticed it.  I was going to
rush by  get away, but a lot of dogs jumped out  went to howling
 barking at me,  I knowed better than to move anor peg.




CHAPTER XVII.

IN about a minute somebody spoke out of a window without putting his
head out,  says:

“Be done, boys!  Who’s re?”

I says:

“It’s me.”

“Who’s me?”

“George Jackson, sir.”

“What do you want?”

“I don’t want nothing, sir.  I only want to go along by, but  dogs
won’t let me.”

“What are you prowling around here this time of night for--hey?”

“I warn’t prowling around, sir, I fell overboard off of  steamboat.”

“Oh, you did, did you?  Strike a light re, somebody.  What did you
say your name was?”

“George Jackson, sir.  I’m only a boy.”

“Look here, if you’re telling  truth you needn’t be afraid--nobody’ll
hurt you.  But don’t try to budge; st right where you are.  Rouse out
Bob  Tom, some of you,  fetch  guns.  George Jackson, is re
anybody with you?”

“No, sir, nobody.”

I heard  people stirring around in  house now,  see a light.
 man sung out:

“Snatch that light away, Betsy, you old fool--ain’t you got any sense?
Put it on  floor behind  front door.  Bob, if you  Tom are
ready, take your places.”

“All ready.”

“Now, George Jackson, do you know  Shepherdsons?”

“No, sir; I never heard of m.”

“Well, that may be so,  it mayn’t.  Now, all ready.  Step forward,
George Jackson.   mind, don’t you hurry--come mighty slow.  If re’s
anybody with you, let him keep back--if he shows himself he’ll be shot.
Come along now.  Come slow; push  door open yourself--just enough to
squeeze in, d’ you hear?”

I didn’t hurry; I couldn’t if I’d a wanted to.  I took one slow step at
a time  re warn’t a sound, only I thought I could hear my heart.
  dogs were as still as  humans, but y followed a little behind
me. When I got to  three log doorsteps I heard m unlocking 
unbarring  unbolting.  I put my h on  door  pushed it a
little  a little more till somebody said, “re, that’s enough--put
your head in.” I done it, but I judged y would take it off.

 cle was on  floor,  re y all was, looking at me, 
me at m, for about a quarter of a minute:  Three big men with guns
pointed at me, which made me wince, I tell you;  oldest, gray
 about sixty,  or two thirty or more--all of m fine 
hsome--  sweetest old gray-headed lady,  back of her two
young women which I couldn’t see right well.   old gentleman says:

“re; I reckon it’s all right.  Come in.”

As soon as I was in  old gentleman he locked  door  barred it
 bolted it,  told  young men to come in with ir guns, 
y all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on  floor,
 got toger in a corner that was out of  range of  front
windows--re warn’t none on  side.  y held  cle,  took a
good look at me,  all said, “Why, _he_ ain’t a Shepherdson--no, re
ain’t any Shepherdson about him.”  n  old man said he hoped I
wouldn’t mind being searched for arms, because he didn’t mean no harm by
it--it was only to make sure.  So he didn’t pry into my pockets, but only
felt outside with his hs,  said it was all right.  He told me to
make myself easy  at home,  tell all about myself; but  old
lady says:

“Why, bless you, Saul,  poor thing’s as wet as he can be;  don’t
you reckon it may be he’s hungry?”

“True for you, Rachel--I forgot.”

So  old lady says:

“Betsy” (this was a nigger woman), “you fly around  get him something
to eat as quick as you can, poor thing;  one of you girls go  wake
up Buck  tell him--oh, here he is himself.  Buck, take this little
stranger  get  wet clos off from him  dress him up in some
of yours that’s dry.”

Buck looked about as old as me--thirteen or fourteen or along re,
though he was a little bigger than me.  He hadn’t on anything but a
shirt,  he was very frowzy-headed.  He came in gaping  digging one
fist into his eyes,  he was dragging a gun along with  or one.
He says:

“Ain’t y no Shepherdsons around?”

y said, no, ‘twas a false alarm.

“Well,” he says, “if y’d a ben some, I reckon I’d a got one.”

y all laughed,  Bob says:

“Why, Buck, y might have scalped us all, you’ve been so slow in
coming.”

“Well, nobody come after me,  it ain’t right I’m always kept down; I
don’t get no show.”

“Never mind, Buck, my boy,” says  old man, “you’ll have show enough,
all in good time, don’t you fret about that.  Go ‘long with you now, 
do as your mor told you.”

When we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt  a
roundabout  pants of his,  I put m on.  While I was at it he
asked me what my name was, but before I could tell him he started to
tell me about a bluejay  a young rabbit he had catched in  woods
day before yesterday,  he asked me where Moses was when  cle
went out.  I said I didn’t know; I hadn’t heard about it before, no way.

“Well, guess,” he says.

“How’m I going to guess,” says I, “when I never heard tell of it
before?”

“But you can guess, can’t you?  It’s just as easy.”

“_Which_ cle?”  I says.

“Why, any cle,” he says.

“I don’t know where he was,” says I; “where was he?”

“Why, he was in  _dark_!  That’s where he was!”

“Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me for?”

“Why, blame it, it’s a riddle, don’t you see?  Say, how long are you
going to stay here?  You got to stay always.  We can just have booming
times--y don’t have no school now.  Do you own a dog?  I’ve got a
dog-- he’ll go in  river  bring out chips that you throw in.  Do
you like to comb up Sundays,  all that kind of foolishness?  You bet
I don’t, but ma she makes me.  Confound se ole britches!  I reckon
I’d better put ‘em on, but I’d rur not, it’s so warm.  Are you all
ready? All right.  Come along, old hoss.”

Cold corn-pone, cold corn-beef, butter  buttermilk--that is what y
had for me down re,  re ain’t nothing better that ever I’ve
come across yet.  Buck  his ma  all of m smoked cob pipes,
except  nigger woman, which was gone,   two young women.  y
all smoked  talked,  I eat  talked.   young women had
quilts around m,  ir hair down ir backs.  y all asked me
questions,  I told m how pap  me  all  family was living
on a little farm down at  bottom of Arkansaw,  my sister Mary Ann
run off  got married  never was heard of no more,  Bill went
to hunt m  he warn’t heard of no more,  Tom  Mort died,
 n re warn’t nobody but just me  pap left,  he was just
trimmed down to nothing, on account of his troubles; so when he died
I took what re was left, because  farm didn’t belong to us, 
started up  river, deck passage,  fell overboard;  that was how
I come to be here.  So y said I could have a home re as long as I
wanted it.  n it was most daylight  everybody went to bed,  I
went to bed with Buck,  when I waked up in  morning, drat it all,
I had forgot what my name was. So I laid re about an hour trying to
think,  when Buck waked up I says:

“Can you spell, Buck?”

“Yes,” he says.

“I bet you can’t spell my name,” says I.

“I bet you what you dare I can,” says he.

“All right,” says I, “go ahead.”

“G-e-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n--re now,” he says.

“Well,” says I, “you done it, but I didn’t think you could.  It ain’t no
slouch of a name to spell--right off without studying.”

I set it down, private, because somebody might want _me_ to spell it
next,  so I wanted to be hy with it  rattle it off like I was
used to it.

It was a mighty nice family,  a mighty nice house, too.  I hadn’t
seen no house out in  country before that was so nice  had so much
style.  It didn’t have an iron latch on  front door, nor a wooden one
with a buckskin string, but a brass knob to turn,  same as houses in
town. re warn’t no bed in  parlor, nor a sign of a bed; but heaps
of parlors in towns has beds in m.  re was a big fireplace that
was bricked on  bottom,   bricks was kept clean  red by
pouring water on m  scrubbing m with anor brick; sometimes
y wash m over with red water-paint that y call Spanish-brown,
same as y do in town.  y had big brass dog-irons that could hold
up a saw-log. re was a clock on  middle of  mantelpiece, with
a picture of a town painted on  bottom half of  glass front, 
a round place in  middle of it for  sun,  you could see 
pendulum swinging behind it.  It was beautiful to hear that clock tick;
 sometimes when one of se peddlers had been along  scoured her
up  got her in good shape, she would start in  strike a hundred
 fifty before she got tuckered out.  y wouldn’t took any money for
her.

Well, re was a big outlish parrot on each side of  clock,
made out of something like chalk,  painted up gaudy.  By one of 
parrots was a cat made of crockery,  a crockery dog by  or;
 when you pressed down on m y squeaked, but didn’t open
ir mouths nor look different nor interested.  y squeaked through
underneath.  re was a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out
behind those things.  On  table in  middle of  room was a kind
of a lovely crockery basket that had apples  oranges  peaches 
grapes piled up in it, which was much redder  yellower  prettier
than real ones is, but y warn’t real because you could see where
pieces had got chipped off  showed  white chalk, or whatever it
was, underneath.

This table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth, with a red 
blue spread-eagle painted on it,  a painted border all around.  It
come all  way from Philadelphia, y said.  re was some books,
too, piled up perfectly exact, on each corner of  table.  One was a
big family Bible full of pictures.  One was Pilgrim’s Progress, about a
man that left his family, it didn’t say why.  I read considerable in it
now  n.   statements was interesting, but tough.  Anor was
Friendship’s Offering, full of beautiful stuff  poetry; but I didn’t
read  poetry.  Anor was Henry Clay’s Speeches,  anor was Dr.
Gunn’s Family Medicine, which told you all about what to do if a body
was sick or dead.  re was a hymn book,  a lot of or books.  
re was nice split-bottom chairs,  perfectly sound, too--not bagged
down in  middle  busted, like an old basket.

y had pictures hung on  walls--mainly Washingtons  Lafayettes,
 battles,  Highl Marys,  one called “Signing 
Declaration.” re was some that y called crayons, which one of 
daughters which was dead made her own self when she was only
fifteen years old.  y was different from any pictures I ever see
before--blacker, mostly, than is common.  One was a woman in a slim black
dress, belted small under  armpits, with bulges like a cabbage in
 middle of  sleeves,  a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with
a black veil,  white slim ankles crossed about with black tape, 
very wee black slippers, like a chisel,  she was leaning pensive on a
tombstone on her right elbow, under a weeping willow,  her or h
hanging down her side holding a white hkerchief  a reticule,
 underneath  picture it said “Shall I Never See e More Alas.”
  Anor one was a young lady with her hair all combed up straight
to  top of her head,  knotted re in front of a comb like a
chair-back,  she was crying into a hkerchief  had a dead bird
laying on its back in her or h with its heels up,  underneath
 picture it said “I Shall Never Hear Thy Sweet Chirrup More Alas.”
  re was one where a young lady was at a window looking up at 
moon,  tears running down her cheeks;  she had an open letter in
one h with black sealing wax showing on one edge of it,  she was
mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth,  underneath
 picture it said “ Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art Gone Alas.”  se
was all nice pictures, I reckon, but I didn’t somehow seem to take
to m, because if ever I was down a little y always give me 
fan-tods.  Everybody was sorry she died, because she had laid out a lot
more of se pictures to do,  a body could see by what she had done
what y had lost.  But I reckoned that with her disposition she was
having a better time in  graveyard.  She was at work on what y
said was her greatest picture when she took sick,  every day 
every night it was her prayer to be allowed to live till she got it
done, but she never got  chance.  It was a picture of a young woman
in a long white gown, sting on  rail of a bridge all ready to jump
off, with her hair all down her back,  looking up to  moon, with
 tears running down her face,  she had two arms folded across her
breast,  two arms stretched out in front,  two more reaching up
towards  moon--  idea was to see which pair would look best,
 n scratch out all  or arms; but, as I was saying, she died
before she got her mind made up,  now y kept this picture over 
head of  bed in her room,  every time her birthday come y hung
flowers on it.  Or times it was hid with a little curtain.   young
woman in  picture had a kind of a nice sweet face, but re was so
many arms it made her look too spidery, seemed to me.

This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive,  used to paste
obituaries  accidents  cases of patient suffering in it out of 
Presbyterian Observer,  write poetry after m out of her own head.
It was very good poetry. This is what she wrote about a boy by  name
of Stephen Dowling Bots that fell down a well  was drownded:

ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS, DEC’D

 did young Stephen sicken,     did young Stephen die?  did 
sad hearts thicken,     did  mourners cry?

No; such was not  fate of    Young Stephen Dowling Bots; Though sad
hearts round him thickened,    ‘Twas not from sickness’ shots.

No whooping-cough did rack his frame,    Nor measles drear with spots;
Not se impaired  sacred name    Of Stephen Dowling Bots.

Despised love struck not with woe    That head of curly knots, Nor
stomach troubles laid him low,    Young Stephen Dowling Bots.

O no. n list with tearful eye,    Whilst I his fate do tell. His soul
did from this cold world fly    By falling down a well.

y got him out  emptied him;    Alas it was too late; His spirit
was gone for to sport aloft    In  realms of  good  great.

If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that before she was
fourteen, re ain’t no telling what she could a done by  by.  Buck
said she could rattle off poetry like nothing.  She didn’t ever have to
stop to think.  He said she would slap down a line,  if she couldn’t
find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out  slap down
anor one,  go ahead. She warn’t particular; she could write about
anything you choose to give her to write about just so it was sadful.
Every time a man died, or a woman died, or a child died, she would be on
h with her “tribute” before he was cold.  She called m tributes.
 neighbors said it was  doctor first, n Emmeline, n 
undertaker-- undertaker never got in ahead of Emmeline but once, 
n she hung fire on a rhyme for  dead person’s name, which was
Whistler.  She warn’t ever  same after that; she never complained,
but she kinder pined away  did not live long.  Poor thing, many’s 
time I made myself go up to  little room that used to be hers  get
out her poor old scrap-book  read in it when her pictures had been
aggravating me  I had soured on her a little.  I liked all that
family, dead ones  all,  warn’t going to let anything come between
us.  Poor Emmeline made poetry about all  dead people when she was
alive,  it didn’t seem right that re warn’t nobody to make some
about her now she was gone; so I tried to sweat out a verse or two
myself, but I couldn’t seem to make it go somehow.  y kept Emmeline’s
room trim  nice,  all  things fixed in it just  way she
liked to have m when she was alive,  nobody ever slept re.
  old lady took care of  room herself, though re was plenty
of niggers,  she sewed re a good deal  read her Bible re
mostly.

Well, as I was saying about  parlor, re was beautiful curtains on
 windows:  white, with pictures painted on m of castles with vines
all down  walls,  cattle coming down to drink.  re was a little
old piano, too, that had tin pans in it, I reckon,  nothing was ever
so lovely as to hear  young ladies sing “ Last Link is Broken”
  play “ Battle of Prague” on it.   walls of all  rooms was
plastered,  most had carpets on  floors,   whole house was
whitewashed on  outside.

It was a double house,   big open place betwixt m was roofed
 floored,  sometimes  table was set re in  middle of 
day,  it was a cool, comfortable place.  Nothing couldn’t be better.
  warn’t  cooking good,  just bushels of it too!




CHAPTER XVIII.

COL.  Grangerford was a gentleman, you see.  He was a gentleman all
over;  so was his family.  He was well born, as  saying is, 
that’s worth as much in a man as it is in a horse, so  Widow Douglas
said,  nobody ever denied that she was of  first aristocracy
in our town;  pap he always said it, too, though he warn’t no more
quality than a mudcat himself.  Col.  Grangerford was very tall 
very slim,  had a darkish-paly complexion, not a sign of red in it
anywheres; he was clean shaved every morning all over his thin face, 
he had  thinnest kind of lips,   thinnest kind of nostrils, 
a high nose,  heavy eyebrows,   blackest kind of eyes, sunk so
deep back that y seemed like y was looking out of caverns at
you, as you may say.  His forehead was high,  his hair was black 
straight  hung to his shoulders. His hs was long  thin, 
every day of his life he put on a clean shirt  a full suit from head
to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes to look at it;
 on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it.  He
carried a mahogany cane with a silver head to it.  re warn’t no
frivolishness about him, not a bit,  he warn’t ever loud.  He was
as kind as he could be--you could feel that, you know,  so you had
confidence.  Sometimes he smiled,  it was good to see; but when he
straightened himself up like a liberty-pole,   lightning begun to
flicker out from under his eyebrows, you wanted to climb a tree first,
 find out what  matter was afterwards.  He didn’t ever have to
tell anybody to mind ir manners--everybody was always good-mannered
where he was.  Everybody loved to have him around, too; he was sunshine
most always--I mean he made it seem like good wear.  When he turned
into a cloudbank it was awful dark for half a minute,  that was
enough; re wouldn’t nothing go wrong again for a week.

When him   old lady come down in  morning all  family got
up out of ir chairs  give m good-day,  didn’t set down again
till y had set down.  n Tom  Bob went to  sideboard where
 decanter was,  mixed a glass of bitters  hed it to him, 
he held it in his h  waited till Tom’s  Bob’s was mixed, 
n y bowed  said, “Our duty to you, sir,  madam;”  _y_
bowed  least bit in  world  said thank you,  so y drank,
all three,  Bob  Tom poured a spoonful of water on  sugar 
 mite of whisky or apple bry in  bottom of ir tumblers, 
give it to me  Buck,  we drank to  old people too.

Bob was  oldest  Tom next--tall, beautiful men with very broad
shoulders  brown faces,  long black hair  black eyes.  y
dressed in white linen from head to foot, like  old gentleman, 
wore broad Panama hats.

n re was Miss Charlotte; she was twenty-five,  tall  proud
 gr, but as good as she could be when she warn’t stirred up; but
when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks,
like her far.  She was beautiful.

So was her sister, Miss Sophia, but it was a different kind.  She was
gentle  sweet like a dove,  she was only twenty.

Each person had ir own nigger to wait on m--Buck too.  My nigger
had a monstrous easy time, because I warn’t used to having anybody do
anything for me, but Buck’s was on  jump most of  time.

This was all re was of  family now, but re used to be
more--three sons; y got killed;  Emmeline that died.

 old gentleman owned a lot of farms  over a hundred niggers.
Sometimes a stack of people would come re, horseback, from ten or
fifteen mile around,  stay five or six days,  have such junketings
round about  on  river,  dances  picnics in  woods
daytimes,  balls at  house nights.  se people was mostly
kinfolks of  family.   men brought ir guns with m.  It was a
hsome lot of quality, I tell you.

re was anor clan of aristocracy around re--five or six
families--mostly of  name of Shepherdson.  y was as high-toned
 well born  rich  gr as  tribe of Grangerfords.  
Shepherdsons  Grangerfords used  same steamboat ling, which was
about two mile above our house; so sometimes when I went up re with a
lot of our folks I used to see a lot of  Shepherdsons re on ir
fine horses.

One day Buck  me was away out in  woods hunting,  heard a horse
coming.  We was crossing  road.  Buck says:

“Quick!  Jump for  woods!”

We done it,  n peeped down  woods through  leaves.  Pretty
soon a splendid young man come galloping down  road, setting his
horse easy  looking like a soldier.  He had his gun across his
pommel.  I had seen him before.  It was young Harney Shepherdson.  I
heard Buck’s gun go off at my ear,  Harney’s hat tumbled off from his
head.  He grabbed his gun  rode straight to  place where we was
hid.  But we didn’t wait.  We started through  woods on a run.  
woods warn’t thick, so I looked over my shoulder to dodge  bullet,
 twice I seen Harney cover Buck with his gun;  n he rode away
 way he come--to get his hat, I reckon, but I couldn’t see.  We never
stopped running till we got home.   old gentleman’s eyes blazed a
minute--‘twas pleasure, mainly, I judged--n his face sort of smood
down,  he says, kind of gentle:

“I don’t like that shooting from behind a bush.  Why didn’t you step
into  road, my boy?”

“ Shepherdsons don’t, far.  y always take advantage.”

Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while Buck was telling
his tale,  her nostrils spread  her eyes snapped.   two young
men looked dark, but never said nothing.  Miss Sophia she turned pale,
but  color come back when she found  man warn’t hurt.

Soon as I could get Buck down by  corn-cribs under  trees by
ourselves, I says:

“Did you want to kill him, Buck?”

“Well, I bet I did.”

“What did he do to you?”

“Him?  He never done nothing to me.”

“Well, n, what did you want to kill him for?”

“Why, nothing--only it’s on account of  feud.”

“What’s a feud?”

“Why, where was you raised?  Don’t you know what a feud is?”

“Never heard of it before--tell me about it.”

“Well,” says Buck, “a feud is this way:  A man has a quarrel with
anor man,  kills him; n that or man’s bror kills _him_;
n  or brors, on both sides, goes for one anor; n 
_cousins_ chip in-- by  by everybody’s killed off,  re ain’t
no more feud.  But it’s kind of slow,  takes a long time.”

“Has this one been going on long, Buck?”

“Well, I should _reckon_!  It started thirty year ago, or som’ers along
re.  re was trouble ‘bout something,  n a lawsuit to settle
it;   suit went agin one of  men,  so he up  shot 
man that won  suit--which he would naturally do, of course.  Anybody
would.”

“What was  trouble about, Buck?--l?”

“I reckon maybe--I don’t know.”

“Well, who done  shooting?  Was it a Grangerford or a Shepherdson?”

“Laws, how do I know?  It was so long ago.”

“Don’t anybody know?”

“Oh, yes, pa knows, I reckon,  some of  or old people; but y
don’t know now what  row was about in  first place.”

“Has re been many killed, Buck?”

“Yes; right smart chance of funerals.  But y don’t always kill.  Pa’s
got a few buckshot in him; but he don’t mind it ‘cuz he don’t weigh
much, anyway.  Bob’s been carved up some with a bowie,  Tom’s been
hurt once or twice.”

“Has anybody been killed this year, Buck?”

“Yes; we got one  y got one.  ‘Bout three months ago my cousin
Bud, fourteen year old, was riding through  woods on t’or side
of  river,  didn’t have no weapon with him, which was blame’
foolishness,  in a lonesome place he hears a horse a-coming behind
him,  sees old Baldy Shepherdson a-linkin’ after him with his gun in
his h  his white hair a-flying in  wind;  ‘stead of jumping
off  taking to  brush, Bud ‘lowed he could out-run him; so y
had it, nip  tuck, for five mile or more,  old man a-gaining all
 time; so at last Bud seen it warn’t any use, so he stopped  faced
around so as to have  bullet holes in front, you know,   old
man he rode up  shot him down.  But he didn’t git much chance to
enjoy his luck, for inside of a week our folks laid _him_ out.”

“I reckon that old man was a coward, Buck.”

“I reckon he _warn’t_ a coward.  Not by a blame’ sight.  re ain’t a
coward amongst m Shepherdsons--not a one.   re ain’t no cowards
amongst  Grangerfords eir.  Why, that old man kep’ up his end in a
fight one day for half an hour against three Grangerfords,  come
out winner.  y was all a-horseback; he lit off of his horse  got
behind a little woodpile,  kep’ his horse before him to stop 
bullets; but  Grangerfords stayed on ir horses  capered around
 old man,  peppered away at him,  he peppered away at m.
 Him  his horse both went home pretty leaky  crippled, but 
Grangerfords had to be _fetched_ home-- one of ‘em was dead, 
anor died  next day.  No, sir; if a body’s out hunting for cowards
he don’t want to fool away any time amongst m Shepherdsons, becuz
y don’t breed any of that _kind_.”

Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile, everybody
a-horseback.  men took ir guns along, so did Buck,  kept
m between ir knees or stood m hy against  wall.  
Shepherdsons done  same.  It was pretty ornery preaching--all about
brorly love,  such-like tiresomeness; but everybody said it was
a good sermon,  y all talked it over going home,  had such
a powerful lot to say about faith  good works  free grace 
preforeordestination,  I don’t know what all, that it did seem to me
to be one of  roughest Sundays I had run across yet.

About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around, some in ir
chairs  some in ir rooms,  it got to be pretty dull.  Buck 
a dog was stretched out on  grass in  sun sound asleep.  I went up
to our room,  judged I would take a nap myself.  I found that sweet
Miss Sophia sting in her door, which was next to ours,  she took
me in her room  shut  door very soft,  asked me if I liked her,
 I said I did;  she asked me if I would do something for her 
not tell anybody,  I said I would.  n she said she’d forgot her
Testament,  left it in  seat at church between two or books,
 would I slip out quiet  go re  fetch it to her,  not say
nothing to nobody.  I said I would. So I slid out  slipped off up 
road,  re warn’t anybody at  church, except maybe a hog or two,
for re warn’t any lock on  door,  hogs likes a puncheon floor
in summer-time because it’s cool.  If you notice, most folks don’t go to
church only when y’ve got to; but a hog is different.

Says I to myself, something’s up; it ain’t natural for a girl to be in
such a sweat about a Testament.  So I give it a shake,  out drops a
little piece of paper with “HALF-PAST TWO” wrote on it with a pencil.  I
ransacked it, but couldn’t find anything else.  I couldn’t make anything
out of that, so I put  paper in  book again,  when I got home
 upstairs re was Miss Sophia in her door waiting for me.  She
pulled me in  shut  door; n she looked in  Testament till
she found  paper,  as soon as she read it she looked glad; 
before a body could think she grabbed me  give me a squeeze, 
said I was  best boy in  world,  not to tell anybody.  She was
mighty red in  face for a minute,  her eyes lighted up,  it
made her powerful pretty.  I was a good deal astonished, but when I got
my breath I asked her what  paper was about,  she asked me if I
had read it,  I said no,  she asked me if I could read writing,
 I told her “no, only coarse-h,”  n she said  paper
warn’t anything but a book-mark to keep her place,  I might go 
play now.

I went off down to  river, studying over this thing,  pretty soon
I noticed that my nigger was following along behind.  When we was out
of sight of  house he looked back  around a second,  n comes
a-running,  says:

“Mars Jawge, if you’ll come down into de swamp I’ll show you a whole
stack o’ water-moccasins.”

Thinks I, that’s mighty curious; he said that yesterday.  He oughter
know a body don’t love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for
m. What is he up to, anyway?  So I says:

“All right; trot ahead.”

I followed a half a mile; n he struck out over  swamp,  waded
ankle deep as much as anor half-mile.  We come to a little flat piece
of l which was dry  very thick with trees  bushes  vines,
 he says:

“You shove right in dah jist a few steps, Mars Jawge; dah’s whah dey is.
I’s seed ‘m befo’; I don’t k’yer to see ‘em no mo’.”

n he slopped right along  went away,  pretty soon  trees hid
him.  I poked into  place a-ways  come to a little open patch
as big as a bedroom all hung around with vines,  found a man laying
re asleep--, by jings, it was my old Jim!

I waked him up,  I reckoned it was going to be a gr surprise to
him to see me again, but it warn’t.  He nearly cried he was so glad, but
he warn’t surprised.  Said he swum along behind me that night,  heard
me yell every time, but dasn’t answer, because he didn’t want nobody to
pick _him_ up  take him into slavery again.  Says he:

“I got hurt a little, en couldn’t swim fas’, so I wuz a considable ways
behine you towards de las’; when you led I reck’ned I could ketch
up wid you on de lan’ ‘dout havin’ to shout at you, but when I see dat
house I begin to go slow.  I ‘uz off too fur to hear what dey say to
you--I wuz ‘fraid o’ de dogs; but when it ‘uz all quiet agin I knowed
you’s in de house, so I struck out for de woods to wait for day.  Early
in de mawnin’ some er de niggers come along, gwyne to de fields, en dey
tuk me en showed me dis place, whah de dogs can’t track me on accounts
o’ de water, en dey brings me truck to eat every night, en tells me how
you’s a-gitt’n along.”

“Why didn’t you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner, Jim?”

“Well, ‘twarn’t no use to ‘sturb you, Huck, tell we could do sumfn--but
we’s all right now.  I ben a-buyin’ pots en pans en vittles, as I got a
chanst, en a-patchin’ up de raf’ nights when--”

“_What_ raft, Jim?”

“Our ole raf’.”

“You mean to say our old raft warn’t smashed all to flinders?”

“No, she warn’t.  She was tore up a good deal--one en’ of her was; but
dey warn’t no great harm done, on’y our traps was mos’ all los’.  Ef we
hadn’ dive’ so deep en swum so fur under water, en de night hadn’ ben
so dark, en we warn’t so sk’yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de sayin’
is, we’d a seed de raf’.  But it’s jis’ as well we didn’t, ‘kase now
she’s all fixed up agin mos’ as good as new, en we’s got a new lot o’
stuff, in de place o’ what ‘uz los’.”

“Why, how did you get hold of  raft again, Jim--did you catch her?”

“How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods?  No; some er de niggers
foun’ her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben’, en dey hid her in a
crick ‘mongst de willows, en dey wuz so much jawin’ ‘bout which un ‘um
she b’long to de mos’ dat I come to heah ‘bout it pooty soon, so I ups
en settles de trouble by tellin’ ‘um she don’t b’long to none uv um, but
to you en me; en I ast ‘m if dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman’s
propaty, en git a hid’n for it?  Den I gin ‘m ten cents apiece, en dey
‘uz mighty well satisfied, en wisht some mo’ raf’s ‘ud come along en
make ‘m rich agin. Dey’s mighty good to me, dese niggers is, en whatever
I wants ‘m to do fur me I doan’ have to ast ‘m twice, honey.  Dat Jack’s
a good nigger, en pooty smart.”

“Yes, he is.  He ain’t ever told me you was here; told me to come, 
he’d show me a lot of water-moccasins.  If anything happens _he_ ain’t
mixed up in it.  He can say he never seen us toger,  it ‘ll be 
truth.”

I don’t want to talk much about  next day.  I reckon I’ll cut it
pretty short.  I waked up about dawn,  was a-going to turn over 
go to sleep again when I noticed how still it was--didn’t seem to be
anybody stirring.  That warn’t usual.  Next I noticed that Buck was
up  gone. Well, I gets up, a-wondering,  goes down stairs--nobody
around; everything as still as a mouse.  Just  same outside.  Thinks
I, what does it mean?  Down by  wood-pile I comes across my Jack, 
says:

“What’s it all about?”

Says he:

“Don’t you know, Mars Jawge?”

“No,” says I, “I don’t.”

“Well, den, Miss Sophia’s run off! ‘deed she has.  She run off in de
night some time--nobody don’t know jis’ when; run off to get married
to dat young Harney Shepherdson, you know--leastways, so dey ‘spec.  De
fambly foun’ it out ‘bout half an hour ago--maybe a little mo’--en’ I
_tell_ you dey warn’t no time los’.  Sich anor hurryin’ up guns
en hosses _you_ never see!  De women folks has gone for to stir up de
relations, en ole Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de
river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him ‘fo’ he kin
git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia.  I reck’n dey’s gwyne to be mighty
rough times.”

“Buck went off ‘thout waking me up.”

“Well, I reck’n he _did_!  Dey warn’t gwyne to mix you up in it.
 Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en ‘lowed he’s gwyne to fetch home a
Shepherdson or bust. Well, dey’ll be plenty un ‘m dah, I reck’n, en you
bet you he’ll fetch one ef he gits a chanst.”

I took up  river road as hard as I could put.  By  by I begin to
hear guns a good ways off.  When I come in sight of  log store 
 woodpile where  steamboats ls I worked along under  trees
 brush till I got to a good place,  n I clumb up into 
forks of a cottonwood that was out of reach,  watched.  re was a
wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of  tree,  first I
was going to hide behind that; but maybe it was luckier I didn’t.

re was four or five men cavorting around on ir horses in  open
place before  log store, cussing  yelling,  trying to get at
a couple of young chaps that was behind  wood-rank alongside of 
steamboat ling; but y couldn’t come it.  Every time one of m
showed himself on  river side of  woodpile he got shot at.  
two boys was squatting back to back behind  pile, so y could watch
both ways.

By  by  men stopped cavorting around  yelling.  y started
riding towards  store; n up gets one of  boys, draws a steady
bead over  wood-rank,  drops one of m out of his saddle.  All
 men jumped off of ir horses  grabbed  hurt one  started
to carry him to  store;  that minute  two boys started on 
run.  y got half way to  tree I was in before  men noticed.
n  men see m,  jumped on ir horses  took out after
m.  y gained on  boys, but it didn’t do no good,  boys had
too good a start; y got to  woodpile that was in front of my tree,
 slipped in behind it,  so y had  bulge on  men again.
One of  boys was Buck,   or was a slim young chap about
nineteen years old.

 men ripped around awhile,  n rode away.  As soon as y was
out of sight I sung out to Buck  told him.  He didn’t know what
to make of my voice coming out of  tree at first.  He was awful
surprised.  He told me to watch out sharp  let him know when 
men come in sight again; said y was up to some devilment or
or--wouldn’t be gone long.  I wished I was out of that tree, but I
dasn’t come down.  Buck begun to cry  rip,  ‘lowed that him 
his cousin Joe (that was  or young chap) would make up for this
day yet.  He said his far  his two brors was killed,  two
or three of  enemy.  Said  Shepherdsons laid for m in
ambush.  Buck said his far  brors ought to waited for ir
relations-- Shepherdsons was too strong for m.  I asked him what
was become of young Harney  Miss Sophia.  He said y’d got across
 river  was safe.  I was glad of that; but  way Buck did take
on because he didn’t manage to kill Harney that day he shot at him--I
hain’t ever heard anything like it.

All of a sudden, bang! bang! bang! goes three or four guns-- men had
slipped around through  woods  come in from behind without ir
horses!   boys jumped for  river--both of m hurt-- as y
swum down  current  men run along  bank shooting at m 
singing out, “Kill m, kill m!”  It made me so sick I most fell out
of  tree.  I ain’t a-going to tell _all_ that happened--it would make
me sick again if I was to do that.  I wished I hadn’t ever come ashore
that night to see such things.  I ain’t ever going to get shut of
m--lots of times I dream about m.

I stayed in  tree till it begun to get dark, afraid to come down.
Sometimes I heard guns away off in  woods;  twice I seen little
gangs of men gallop past  log store with guns; so I reckoned 
trouble was still a-going on.  I was mighty downhearted; so I made up my
mind I wouldn’t ever go anear that house again, because I reckoned I
was to blame, somehow. I judged that that piece of paper meant that Miss
Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two  run off; 
I judged I ought to told her far about that paper   curious way
she acted,  n maybe he would a locked her up,  this awful mess
wouldn’t ever happened.

When I got down out of  tree I crept along down  river bank a
piece,  found  two bodies laying in  edge of  water, 
tugged at m till I got m ashore; n I covered up ir faces,
 got away as quick as I could.  I cried a little when I was covering
up Buck’s face, for he was mighty good to me.

It was just dark now.  I never went near  house, but struck through
 woods  made for  swamp.  Jim warn’t on his isl, so I
tramped off in a hurry for  crick,  crowded through  willows,
red-hot to jump aboard  get out of that awful country.   raft was
gone!  My souls, but I was scared!  I couldn’t get my breath for most
a minute. n I raised a yell.  A voice not twenty-five foot from me
says:

“Good lan’! is dat you, honey?  Doan’ make no noise.”

It was Jim’s voice--nothing ever sounded so good before.  I run along 
bank a piece  got aboard,  Jim he grabbed me  hugged me, he was
so glad to see me.  He says:

“Laws bless you, chile, I ‘uz right down sho’ you’s dead agin.  Jack’s
been heah; he say he reck’n you’s ben shot, kase you didn’ come home no
mo’; so I’s jes’ dis minute a startin’ de raf’ down towards de mouf er
de crick, so’s to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack
comes agin en tells me for certain you _is_ dead.  Lawsy, I’s mighty
glad to git you back again, honey.”

I says:

“All right--that’s mighty good; y won’t find me,  y’ll think
I’ve been killed,  floated down  river--re’s something up re
that ‘ll help m think so--so don’t you lose no time, Jim, but just
shove off for  big water as fast as ever you can.”

I never felt easy till  raft was two mile below re  out in
 middle of  Mississippi.  n we hung up our signal lantern, 
judged that we was free  safe once more.  I hadn’t had a bite to eat
since yesterday, so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers  buttermilk,
 pork  cabbage  greens--re ain’t nothing in  world so good
when it’s cooked right-- whilst I eat my supper we talked  had a
good time.  I was powerful glad to get away from  feuds,  so was
Jim to get away from  swamp.  We said re warn’t no home like a
raft, after all.  Or places do seem so cramped up  smory, but a
raft don’t.  You feel mighty free  easy  comfortable on a raft.




CHAPTER XIX.

TWO or three days  nights went by; I reckon I might say y swum by,
y slid along so quiet  smooth  lovely.  Here is  way we put
in  time.  It was a monstrous big river down re--sometimes a mile
 a half wide; we run nights,  laid up  hid daytimes; soon as
night was most gone we stopped navigating  tied up--nearly always
in  dead water under a towhead;  n cut young cottonwoods 
willows,  hid  raft with m.  n we set out  lines.  Next
we slid into  river  had a swim, so as to freshen up  cool
off; n we set down on  sy bottom where  water was about knee
deep,  watched  daylight come.  Not a sound anywheres--perfectly
still--just like  whole world was asleep, only sometimes  bullfrogs
a-cluttering, maybe.   first thing to see, looking away over 
water, was a kind of dull line--that was  woods on t’or side; you
couldn’t make nothing else out; n a pale place in  sky; n more
paleness spreading around; n  river softened up away off, 
warn’t black any more, but gray; you could see little dark spots
drifting along ever so far away--trading scows,  such things; 
long black streaks--rafts; sometimes you could hear a sweep screaking; or
jumbled up voices, it was so still,  sounds come so far;  by 
by you could see a streak on  water which you know by  look of 
streak that re’s a snag re in a swift current which breaks on it
 makes that streak look that way;  you see  mist curl up off
of  water,   east reddens up,   river,  you make out a
log-cabin in  edge of  woods, away on  bank on t’or side of
 river, being a woodyard, likely,  piled by m cheats so you can
throw a dog through it anywheres; n  nice breeze springs up, 
comes fanning you from over re, so cool  fresh  sweet to smell
on account of  woods   flowers; but sometimes not that way,
because y’ve left dead fish laying around, gars  such,  y
do get pretty rank;  next you’ve got  full day,  everything
smiling in  sun,   song-birds just going it!

A little smoke couldn’t be noticed now, so we would take some fish off
of  lines  cook up a hot breakfast.   afterwards we would watch
 lonesomeness of  river,  kind of lazy along,  by  by
lazy off to sleep.  Wake up by  by,  look to see what done it, 
maybe see a steamboat coughing along up-stream, so far off towards 
or side you couldn’t tell nothing about her only wher she was
a stern-wheel or side-wheel; n for about an hour re wouldn’t be
nothing to hear nor nothing to see--just solid lonesomeness.  Next
you’d see a raft sliding by, away off yonder,  maybe a galoot on it
chopping, because y’re most always doing it on a raft; you’d see 
axe flash  come down--you don’t hear nothing; you see that axe go
up again,  by  time it’s above  man’s head n you hear 
_k’chunk_!--it had took all that time to come over  water.  So we
would put in  day, lazying around, listening to  stillness.  Once
re was a thick fog,   rafts  things that went by was beating
tin pans so  steamboats wouldn’t run over m.  A scow or a
raft went by so close we could hear m talking  cussing 
laughing--heard m plain; but we couldn’t see no sign of m; it made
you feel crawly; it was like spirits carrying on that way in  air.
 Jim said he believed it was spirits; but I says:

“No; spirits wouldn’t say, ‘Dern  dern fog.’”

Soon as it was night out we shoved; when we got her out to about 
middle we let her alone,  let her float wherever  current wanted
her to; n we lit  pipes,  dangled our legs in  water, 
talked about all kinds of things--we was always naked, day  night,
whenever  mosquitoes would let us-- new clos Buck’s folks made
for me was too good to be comfortable,  besides I didn’t go much on
clos, nohow.

Sometimes we’d have that whole river all to ourselves for  longest
time. Yonder was  banks   isls, across  water;  maybe
a spark--which was a cle in a cabin window;  sometimes on  water
you could see a spark or two--on a raft or a scow, you know;  maybe
you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of m crafts.
It’s lovely to live on a raft.  We had  sky up re, all speckled
with stars,  we used to lay on our backs  look up at m, 
discuss about wher y was made or only just happened.  Jim he
allowed y was made, but I allowed y happened; I judged it would
have took too long to _make_ so many.  Jim said  moon could a _laid_
m; well, that looked kind of reasonable, so I didn’t say nothing
against it, because I’ve seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it
could be done. We used to watch  stars that fell, too,  see m
streak down.  Jim allowed y’d got spoiled  was hove out of 
nest.

Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in 
dark,  now  n she would belch a whole world of sparks up out
of her chimbleys,  y would rain down in  river  look awful
pretty; n she would turn a corner  her lights would wink out 
her powwow shut off  leave  river still again;  by  by her
waves would get to us, a long time after she was gone,  joggle 
raft a bit,  after that you wouldn’t hear nothing for you couldn’t
tell how long, except maybe frogs or something.

After midnight  people on shore went to bed,  n for two or
three hours  shores was black--no more sparks in  cabin windows.
 se sparks was our clock-- first one that showed again meant
morning was coming, so we hunted a place to hide  tie up right away.

One morning about daybreak I found a canoe  crossed over a chute to
 main shore--it was only two hundred yards-- paddled about a mile
up a crick amongst  cypress woods, to see if I couldn’t get some
berries. Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed
 crick, here comes a couple of men tearing up  path as tight as
y could foot it.  I thought I was a goner, for whenever anybody was
after anybody I judged it was _me_--or maybe Jim.  I was about to dig out
from re in a hurry, but y was pretty close to me n,  sung
out  begged me to save ir lives--said y hadn’t been doing
nothing,  was being chased for it--said re was men  dogs
a-coming.  y wanted to jump right in, but I says:

“Don’t you do it.  I don’t hear  dogs  horses yet; you’ve got time
to crowd through  brush  get up  crick a little ways; n you
take to  water  wade down to me  get in--that’ll throw  dogs
off  scent.”

y done it,  soon as y was aboard I lit out for our towhead,
 in about five or ten minutes we heard  dogs   men away off,
shouting. We heard m come along towards  crick, but couldn’t
see m; y seemed to stop  fool around a while; n, as we got
furr  furr away all  time, we couldn’t hardly hear m at
all; by  time we had left a mile of woods behind us  struck 
river, everything was quiet,  we paddled over to  towhead  hid
in  cottonwoods  was safe.

One of se fellows was about seventy or upwards,  had a bald head
 very gray whiskers.  He had an old battered-up slouch hat on, 
a greasy blue woollen shirt,  ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed
into his boot-tops,  home-knit galluses--no, he only had one.  He had
an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over
his arm,  both of m had big, fat, ratty-looking carpet-bags.

 or fellow was about thirty,  dressed about as ornery.  After
breakfast we all laid off  talked,   first thing that come out
was that se chaps didn’t know one anor.

“What got you into trouble?” says  baldhead to t’or chap.

“Well, I’d been selling an article to take  tartar off  teeth--
it does take it off, too,  generly  enamel along with it--but I
stayed about one night longer than I ought to,  was just in  act
of sliding out when I ran across you on  trail this side of town, 
you told me y were coming,  begged me to help you to get off.  So
I told you I was expecting trouble myself,  would scatter out _with_
you. That’s  whole yarn--what’s yourn?

“Well, I’d ben a-running’ a little temperance revival thar ‘bout a week,
 was  pet of  women folks, big  little, for I was makin’ it
mighty warm for  rummies, I _tell_ you,  takin’ as much as five
or six dollars a night--ten cents a head, children  niggers free--
business a-growin’ all  time, when somehow or anor a little report
got around last night that I had a way of puttin’ in my time with a
private jug on  sly.  A nigger rousted me out this mornin’,  told
me  people was gerin’ on  quiet with ir dogs  horses, 
y’d be along pretty soon  give me ‘bout half an hour’s start,
 n run me down if y could;  if y got me y’d tar
 fear me  ride me on a rail, sure.  I didn’t wait for no
breakfast--I warn’t hungry.”

“Old man,” said  young one, “I reckon we might double-team it
toger; what do you think?”

“I ain’t undisposed.  What’s your line--mainly?”

“Jour printer by trade; do a little in patent medicines;
ater-actor--tragedy, you know; take a turn to mesmerism  phrenology
when re’s a chance; teach singing-geography school for a change;
sling a lecture sometimes--oh, I do lots of things--most anything that
comes hy, so it ain’t work.  What’s your lay?”

“I’ve done considerble in  doctoring way in my time.  Layin’ on o’
hs is my best holt--for cancer  paralysis,  sich things;  I
k’n tell a fortune pretty good when I’ve got somebody along to find out
 facts for me.  Preachin’s my line, too,  workin’ camp-meetin’s,
 missionaryin’ around.”

Nobody never said anything for a while; n  young man hove a sigh
 says:

“Alas!”

“What ‘re you alassin’ about?” says  bald-head.

“To think I should have lived to be leading such a life,  be degraded
down into such company.”   he begun to wipe  corner of his eye
with a rag.

“Dern your skin, ain’t  company good enough for you?” says 
baldhead, pretty pert  uppish.

“Yes, it _is_ good enough for me; it’s as good as I deserve; for who
fetched me so low when I was so high?  I did myself.  I don’t blame
_you_, gentlemen--far from it; I don’t blame anybody.  I deserve it
all.  Let  cold world do its worst; one thing I know--re’s a grave
somewhere for me.  world may go on just as it’s always done,  take
everything from me--loved ones, property, everything; but it can’t take
that. Some day I’ll lie down in it  forget it all,  my poor broken
heart will be at rest.”  He went on a-wiping.

“Drot your pore broken heart,” says  baldhead; “what are you heaving
your pore broken heart at _us_ f’r?  _we_ hain’t done nothing.”

“No, I know you haven’t.  I ain’t blaming you, gentlemen.  I brought
myself down--yes, I did it myself.  It’s right I should suffer--perfectly
right--I don’t make any moan.”

“Brought you down from whar?  Whar was you brought down from?”

“Ah, you would not believe me;  world never believes--let it pass--‘tis
no matter.   secret of my birth--”

“ secret of your birth!  Do you mean to say--”

“Gentlemen,” says  young man, very solemn, “I will reveal it to you,
for I feel I may have confidence in you.  By rights I am a duke!”

Jim’s eyes bugged out when he heard that;  I reckon mine did, too.
n  baldhead says:  “No! you can’t mean it?”

“Yes.  My great-grfar, eldest son of  Duke of Bridgewater, fled
to this country about  end of  last century, to brea  pure
air of freedom; married here,  died, leaving a son, his own far
dying about  same time.   second son of  late duke seized 
titles  estates-- infant real duke was ignored.  I am  lineal
descendant of that infant--I am  rightful Duke of Bridgewater; 
here am I, forlorn, torn from my high estate, hunted of men, despised
by  cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken,  degraded to 
companionship of felons on a raft!”

Jim pitied him ever so much,  so did I. We tried to comfort him, but
he said it warn’t much use, he couldn’t be much comforted; said if we
was a mind to acknowledge him, that would do him more good than most
anything else; so we said we would, if he would tell us how.  He said we
ought to bow when we spoke to him,  say “Your Grace,” or “My Lord,”
 or “Your Lordship”-- he wouldn’t mind it if we called him plain
“Bridgewater,” which, he said, was a title anyway,  not a name; 
one of us ought to wait on him at dinner,  do any little thing for
him he wanted done.

Well, that was all easy, so we done it.  All through dinner Jim stood
around  waited on him,  says, “Will yo’ Grace have some o’ dis or
some o’ dat?”  so on,  a body could see it was mighty pleasing to
him.

But  old man got pretty silent by  by--didn’t have much to say, 
didn’t look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going on
around that duke.  He seemed to have something on his mind.  So, along
in  afternoon, he says:

“Looky here, Bilgewater,” he says, “I’m nation sorry for you, but you
ain’t  only person that’s had troubles like that.”

“No?”

“No you ain’t.  You ain’t  only person that’s ben snaked down
wrongfully out’n a high place.”

“Alas!”

“No, you ain’t  only person that’s had a secret of his birth.”  ,
by jings, _he_ begins to cry.

“Hold!  What do you mean?”

“Bilgewater, kin I trust you?” says  old man, still sort of sobbing.

“To  bitter death!”  He took  old man by  h  squeezed it,
 says, “That secret of your being:  speak!”

“Bilgewater, I am  late Dauphin!”

You bet you, Jim  me stared this time.  n  duke says:

“You are what?”

“Yes, my friend, it is too true--your eyes is lookin’ at this very moment
on  pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy  Seventeen, son of Looy 
Sixteen  Marry Antonette.”

“You!  At your age!  No!  You mean you’re  late Charlemagne; you must
be six or seven hundred years old, at  very least.”

“Trouble has done it, Bilgewater, trouble has done it; trouble has brung
se gray hairs  this premature balditude.  Yes, gentlemen, you
see before you, in blue jeans  misery,  werin’, exiled,
trampled-on,  sufferin’ rightful King of France.”

Well, he cried  took on so that me  Jim didn’t know hardly what to
do, we was so sorry-- so glad  proud we’d got him with us, too.
 So we set in, like we done before with  duke,  tried to comfort
_him_. But he said it warn’t no use, nothing but to be dead  done
with it all could do him any good; though he said it often made him feel
easier  better for a while if people treated him according to his
rights,  got down on one knee to speak to him,  always called him
“Your Majesty,”  waited on him first at meals,  didn’t set down
in his presence till he asked m. So Jim  me set to majestying him,
 doing this  that  t’or for him,  sting up till he
told us we might set down.  This done him heaps of good,  so he
got cheerful  comfortable.  But  duke kind of soured on him, 
didn’t look a bit satisfied with  way things was going; still,
 king acted real friendly towards him,  said  duke’s
great-grfar  all  or Dukes of Bilgewater was a good
deal thought of by _his_ far,  was allowed to come to  palace
considerable; but  duke stayed huffy a good while, till by  by 
king says:

“Like as not we got to be toger a blamed long time on this h-yer
raft, Bilgewater,  so what’s  use o’ your bein’ sour?  It ‘ll only
make things oncomfortable.  It ain’t my fault I warn’t born a duke,
it ain’t your fault you warn’t born a king--so what’s  use to worry?
 Make  best o’ things  way you find ‘em, says I--that’s my motto.
 This ain’t no bad thing that we’ve struck here--plenty grub  an easy
life--come, give us your h, duke,  le’s all be friends.”

 duke done it,  Jim  me was pretty glad to see it.  It took
away all  uncomfortableness  we felt mighty good over it, because
it would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on 
raft; for what you want, above all things, on a raft, is for everybody
to be satisfied,  feel right  kind towards  ors.

It didn’t take me long to make up my mind that se liars warn’t no
kings nor dukes at all, but just low-down humbugs  frauds.  But I
never said nothing, never let on; kept it to myself; it’s  best way;
n you don’t have no quarrels,  don’t get into no trouble.  If y
wanted us to call m kings  dukes, I hadn’t no objections, ‘long as
it would keep peace in  family;  it warn’t no use to tell Jim, so
I didn’t tell him.  If I never learnt nothing else out of pap, I learnt
that  best way to get along with his kind of people is to let m
have ir own way.




CHAPTER XX.

Y asked us considerable many questions; wanted to know what we
covered up  raft that way for,  laid by in  daytime instead of
running--was Jim a runaway nigger?  Says I:

“Goodness sakes! would a runaway nigger run _south_?”

No, y allowed he wouldn’t.  I had to account for things some way, so
I says:

“My folks was living in Pike County, in Missouri, where I was born, 
y all died off but me  pa  my bror Ike.  Pa, he ‘lowed
he’d break up  go down  live with Uncle Ben, who’s got a little
one-horse place on  river, forty-four mile below Orleans.  Pa was
pretty poor,  had some debts; so when he’d squared up re warn’t
nothing left but sixteen dollars  our nigger, Jim.  That warn’t
enough to take us fourteen hundred mile, deck passage nor no or way.
 Well, when  river rose pa had a streak of luck one day; he ketched
this piece of a raft; so we reckoned we’d go down to Orleans on it.
 Pa’s luck didn’t hold out; a steamboat run over  forrard corner of
 raft one night,  we all went overboard  dove under  wheel;
Jim  me come up all right, but pa was drunk,  Ike was only four
years old, so y never come up no more.  Well, for  next day or
two we had considerable trouble, because people was always coming out in
skiffs  trying to take Jim away from me, saying y believed he was
a runaway nigger.  We don’t run daytimes no more now; nights y don’t
bor us.”

 duke says:

“Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in  daytime if we
want to.  I’ll think  thing over--I’ll invent a plan that’ll fix it.
We’ll let it alone for to-day, because of course we don’t want to go by
that town yonder in daylight--it mightn’t be healthy.”

Towards night it begun to darken up  look like rain;  heat
lightning was squirting around low down in  sky,   leaves was
beginning to shiver--it was going to be pretty ugly, it was easy to see
that.  So  duke   king went to overhauling our wigwam, to see
what  beds was like.  My bed was a straw tick better than Jim’s,
which was a corn-shuck tick; re’s always cobs around about in a shuck
tick,  y poke into you  hurt;  when you roll over  dry
shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves; it
makes such a rustling that you wake up.  Well,  duke allowed he would
take my bed; but  king allowed he wouldn’t.  He says:

“I should a reckoned  difference in rank would a sejested to you that
a corn-shuck bed warn’t just fitten for me to sleep on.  Your Grace ‘ll
take  shuck bed yourself.”

Jim  me was in a sweat again for a minute, being afraid re was
going to be some more trouble amongst m; so we was pretty glad when
 duke says:

“‘Tis my fate to be always ground into  mire under  iron heel of
oppression.  Misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit; I yield, I
submit; ‘tis my fate.  I am alone in  world--let me suffer; can bear
it.”

We got away as soon as it was good  dark.   king told us to st
well out towards  middle of  river,  not show a light till we
got a long ways below  town.  We come in sight of  little bunch of
lights by  by--that was  town, you know-- slid by, about a half
a mile out, all right.  When we was three-quarters of a mile below we
hoisted up our signal lantern;  about ten o’clock it come on to rain
 blow  thunder  lighten like everything; so  king told us
to both stay on watch till  wear got better; n him   duke
crawled into  wigwam  turned in for  night.  It was my watch
below till twelve, but I wouldn’t a turned in anyway if I’d had a bed,
because a body don’t see such a storm as that every day in  week, not
by a long sight.  My souls, how  wind did scream along!   every
second or two re’d come a glare that lit up  white-caps for a half
a mile around,  you’d see  isls looking dusty through  rain,
  trees thrashing around in  wind; n comes a H-WHACK!--bum!
bum! bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum--  thunder would go rumbling
 grumbling away,  quit-- n RIP comes anor flash 
anor sockdolager.   waves most washed me off  raft sometimes,
but I hadn’t any clos on,  didn’t mind.  We didn’t have no trouble
about snags;  lightning was glaring  flittering around so constant
that we could see m plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or
that  miss m.

I had  middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sleepy by that time,
so Jim he said he would st  first half of it for me; he was always
mighty good that way, Jim was.  I crawled into  wigwam, but  king
  duke had ir legs sprawled around so re warn’t no show for
me; so I laid outside--I didn’t mind  rain, because it was warm, 
 waves warn’t running so high now.  About two y come up again,
though,  Jim was going to call me; but he changed his mind, because
he reckoned y warn’t high enough yet to do any harm; but he was
mistaken about that, for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a
regular ripper  washed me overboard.  It most killed Jim a-laughing.
 He was  easiest nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway.

I took  watch,  Jim he laid down  snored away;  by  by
 storm let up for good  all;   first cabin-light that showed
I rousted him out,  we slid  raft into hiding quarters for 
day.

 king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast,  him
  duke played seven-up a while, five cents a game.  n y got
tired of it,  allowed y would “lay out a campaign,” as y called
it.  duke went down into his carpet-bag,  fetched up a lot of
little printed bills  read m out loud.  One bill said, “
celebrated Dr. Arm de Montalban, of Paris,” would “lecture on 
Science of Phrenology” at such  such a place, on  blank day of
blank, at ten cents admission,  “furnish charts of character at
twenty-five cents apiece.”   duke said that was _him_.  In anor
bill he was  “world-renowned Shakespearian tragedian, Garrick 
Younger, of Drury Lane, London.”  In or bills he had a lot of or
names  done or wonderful things, like finding water  gold with
a “divining-rod,” “dissipating witch spells,”  so on.  By  by he
says:

“But  histrionic muse is  darling.  Have you ever trod  boards,
Royalty?”

“No,” says  king.

“You shall, n, before you’re three days older, Fallen Greur,” says
 duke.  “ first good town we come to we’ll hire a hall  do 
sword fight in Richard III.   balcony scene in Romeo  Juliet.
How does that strike you?”

“I’m in, up to  hub, for anything that will pay, Bilgewater; but, you
see, I don’t know nothing about play-actin’,  hain’t ever seen much
of it.  I was too small when pap used to have ‘em at  palace.  Do you
reckon you can learn me?”

“Easy!”

“All right.  I’m jist a-freezn’ for something fresh, anyway.  Le’s
commence right away.”

So  duke he told him all about who Romeo was  who Juliet was, 
said he was used to being Romeo, so  king could be Juliet.

“But if Juliet’s such a young gal, duke, my peeled head  my white
whiskers is goin’ to look oncommon odd on her, maybe.”

“No, don’t you worry; se country jakes won’t ever think of that.
Besides, you know, you’ll be in costume,  that makes all 
difference in  world; Juliet’s in a balcony, enjoying  moonlight
before she goes to bed,  she’s got on her night-gown  her ruffled
nightcap.  Here are  costumes for  parts.”

He got out two or three curtain-calico suits, which he said was
meedyevil armor for Richard III.  t’or chap,  a long white
cotton nightshirt  a ruffled nightcap to match.   king was
satisfied; so  duke got out his book  read  parts over in 
most splendid spread-eagle way, prancing around  acting at  same
time, to show how it had got to be done; n he give  book to 
king  told him to get his part by heart.

re was a little one-horse town about three mile down  bend, 
after dinner  duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run
in daylight without it being dangersome for Jim; so he allowed he would
go down to  town  fix that thing.   king allowed he would go,
too,  see if he couldn’t strike something.  We was out of coffee, so
Jim said I better go along with m in  canoe  get some.

When we got re re warn’t nobody stirring; streets empty, 
perfectly dead  still, like Sunday.  We found a sick nigger sunning
himself in a back yard,  he said everybody that warn’t too young or
too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting, about two mile back in 
woods.   king got  directions,  allowed he’d go  work that
camp-meeting for all it was worth,  I might go, too.

 duke said what he was after was a printing-office.  We found it;
a little bit of a concern, up over a carpenter shop--carpenters 
printers all gone to  meeting,  no doors locked.  It was a dirty,
littered-up place,  had ink marks,  hbills with pictures of
horses  runaway niggers on m, all over  walls.   duke shed
his coat  said he was all right now.  So me   king lit out for
 camp-meeting.

We got re in about a half an hour fairly dripping, for it was a most
awful hot day.  re was as much as a thous people re from
twenty mile around.   woods was full of teams  wagons, hitched
everywheres, feeding out of  wagon-troughs  stomping to keep
off  flies.  re was sheds made out of poles  roofed over with
branches, where y had lemonade  gingerbread to sell,  piles of
watermelons  green corn  such-like truck.

 preaching was going on under  same kinds of sheds, only y was
bigger  held crowds of people.   benches was made out of outside
slabs of logs, with holes bored in  round side to drive sticks into
for legs. y didn’t have no backs.   preachers had high platforms
to st on at one end of  sheds.   women had on sun-bonnets;
 some had linsey-woolsey frocks, some gingham ones,  a few of 
young ones had on calico.  Some of  young men was barefooted, 
some of  children didn’t have on any clos but just a tow-linen
shirt.  Some of  old women was knitting,  some of  young folks
was courting on  sly.

 first shed we come to  preacher was lining out a hymn.  He lined
out two lines, everybody sung it,  it was kind of gr to hear it,
re was so many of m  y done it in such a rousing way; n
he lined out two more for m to sing-- so on.   people woke up
more  more,  sung louder  louder;  towards  end some
begun to groan,  some begun to shout.  n  preacher begun to
preach,  begun in earnest, too;  went weaving first to one side of
 platform  n  or,  n a-leaning down over  front
of it, with his arms  his body going all  time,  shouting his
words out with all his might;  every now  n he would hold up
his Bible  spread it open,  kind of pass it around this way 
that, shouting, “It’s  brazen serpent in  wilderness!  Look upon
it  live!”   people would shout out, “Glory!--A-a-_men_!”   so
he went on,   people groaning  crying  saying amen:

“Oh, come to  mourners’ bench! come, black with sin! (_Amen_!) come,
sick  sore! (_Amen_!) come, lame  halt  blind! (_Amen_!) come,
pore  needy, sunk in shame! (_A-A-Men_!) come, all that’s worn 
soiled  suffering!--come with a broken spirit! come with a contrite
heart! come in your rags  sin  dirt!  waters that cleanse
is free,  door of heaven sts open--oh, enter in  be at rest!”
 (_A-A-Men_!  _Glory, Glory Hallelujah!_)

 so on.  You couldn’t make out what  preacher said any more, on
account of  shouting  crying.  Folks got up everywheres in 
crowd,  worked ir way just by main strength to  mourners’
bench, with  tears running down ir faces;  when all 
mourners had got up re to  front benches in a crowd, y sung 
shouted  flung mselves down on  straw, just crazy  wild.

Well,  first I knowed  king got a-going,  you could hear him
over everybody;  next he went a-charging up on to  platform, 
 preacher he begged him to speak to  people,  he done it.  He
told m he was a pirate--been a pirate for thirty years out in 
Indian Ocean-- his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in
a fight,  he was home now to take out some fresh men,  thanks to
goodness he’d been robbed last night  put ashore off of a steamboat
without a cent,  he was glad of it; it was  blessedest thing that
ever happened to him, because he was a changed man now,  happy for
 first time in his life; , poor as he was, he was going to start
right off  work his way back to  Indian Ocean,  put in  rest
of his life trying to turn  pirates into  true path; for he could
do it better than anybody else, being acquainted with all pirate crews
in that ocean;  though it would take him a long time to get re
without money, he would get re anyway,  every time he convinced
a pirate he would say to him, “Don’t you thank me, don’t you give me no
credit; it all belongs to m dear people in Pokeville camp-meeting,
natural brors  benefactors of  race,  that dear preacher
re,  truest friend a pirate ever had!”

 n he busted into tears,  so did everybody.  n somebody
sings out, “Take up a collection for him, take up a collection!”  Well,
a half a dozen made a jump to do it, but somebody sings out, “Let _him_
pass  hat around!”  n everybody said it,  preacher too.

So  king went all through  crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes,
 blessing  people  praising m  thanking m for being
so good to  poor pirates away off re;  every little while 
prettiest kind of girls, with  tears running down ir cheeks, would
up  ask him would he let m kiss him for to remember him by;  he
always done it;  some of m he hugged  kissed as many as five or
six times-- he was invited to stay a week;  everybody wanted him to
live in ir houses,  said y’d think it was an honor; but he said
as this was  last day of  camp-meeting he couldn’t do no good, 
besides he was in a sweat to get to  Indian Ocean right off  go to
work on  pirates.

When we got back to  raft  he come to count up he found he had
collected eighty-seven dollars  seventy-five cents.   n he had
fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky, too, that he found under a
wagon when he was starting home through  woods.   king said,
take it all around, it laid over any day he’d ever put in in 
missionarying line.  He said it warn’t no use talking, heans don’t
amount to shucks alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with.

 duke was thinking _he’d_ been doing pretty well till  king come
to show up, but after that he didn’t think so so much.  He had set
up  printed off two little jobs for farmers in that
printing-office--horse bills-- took  money, four dollars.   he
had got in ten dollars’ worth of advertisements for  paper, which he
said he would put in for four dollars if y would pay in advance--so
y done it.  price of  paper was two dollars a year, but he took
in three subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of m
paying him in advance; y were going to pay in cordwood  onions as
usual, but he said he had just bought  concern  knocked down 
price as low as he could afford it,  was going to run it for cash.
 He set up a little piece of poetry, which he made, himself, out of
his own head--three verses--kind of sweet  saddish-- name of it was,
“Yes, crush, cold world, this breaking heart”-- he left that all set
up  ready to print in  paper,  didn’t charge nothing for it.
 Well, he took in nine dollars  a half,  said he’d done a pretty
square day’s work for it.

n he showed us anor little job he’d printed  hadn’t charged
for, because it was for us.  It had a picture of a runaway nigger with
a bundle on a stick over his shoulder,  “$200 reward” under it.  
reading was all about Jim,  just described him to a dot.  It said
he run away from St. Jacques’ plantation, forty mile below New Orleans,
last winter,  likely went north,  whoever would catch him  send
him back he could have  reward  expenses.

“Now,” says  duke, “after to-night we can run in  daytime if we
want to.  Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim h  foot
with a rope,  lay him in  wigwam  show this hbill  say we
captured him up  river,  were too poor to travel on a steamboat,
so we got this little raft on credit from our friends  are going down
to get  reward.  Hcuffs  chains would look still better on Jim,
but it wouldn’t go well with  story of us being so poor.  Too much
like jewelry.  Ropes are  correct thing--we must preserve  unities,
as we say on  boards.”

We all said  duke was pretty smart,  re couldn’t be no trouble
about running daytimes.  We judged we could make miles enough that night
to get out of  reach of  powwow we reckoned  duke’s work in
 printing office was going to make in that little town; n we could
boom right along if we wanted to.

We laid low  kept still,  never shoved out till nearly ten
o’clock; n we slid by, pretty wide away from  town,  didn’t
hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight of it.

When Jim called me to take  watch at four in  morning, he says:

“Huck, does you reck’n we gwyne to run acrost any mo’ kings on dis
trip?”

“No,” I says, “I reckon not.”

“Well,” says he, “dat’s all right, den.  I doan’ mine one er two kings,
but dat’s enough.  Dis one’s powerful drunk, en de duke ain’ much
better.”

I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French, so he could hear
what it was like; but he said he had been in this country so long, 
had so much trouble, he’d forgot it.




CHAPTER XXI.

IT was after sun-up now, but we went right on  didn’t tie up.  
king   duke turned out by  by looking pretty rusty; but after
y’d jumped overboard  took a swim it chippered m up a good
deal. After breakfast  king he took a seat on  corner of  raft,
 pulled off his boots  rolled up his britches,  let his legs
dangle in  water, so as to be comfortable,  lit his pipe,  went
to getting his Romeo  Juliet by heart.  When he had got it pretty
good him   duke begun to practice it toger.   duke had to
learn him over  over again how to say every speech;  he made him
sigh,  put his h on his heart,  after a while he said he done
it pretty well; “only,” he says, “you mustn’t bellow out _Romeo_!
that way, like a bull--you must say it soft  sick  languishy,
so--R-o-o-meo! that is  idea; for Juliet’s a dear sweet mere child of
a girl, you know,  she doesn’t bray like a jackass.”

Well, next y got out a couple of long swords that  duke made out
of oak laths,  begun to practice  sword fight-- duke called
himself Richard III.;   way y laid on  pranced around
 raft was gr to see.  But by  by  king tripped  fell
overboard,  after that y took a rest,  had a talk about all
kinds of adventures y’d had in or times along  river.

After dinner  duke says:

“Well, Capet, we’ll want to make this a first-class show, you know, so
I guess we’ll add a little more to it.  We want a little something to
answer encores with, anyway.”

“What’s onkores, Bilgewater?”

 duke told him,  n says:

“I’ll answer by doing  Highl fling or  sailor’s hornpipe; 
you--well, let me see--oh, I’ve got it--you can do Hamlet’s soliloquy.”

“Hamlet’s which?”

“Hamlet’s soliloquy, you know;  most celebrated thing in Shakespeare.
Ah, it’s sublime, sublime!  Always fetches  house.  I haven’t got
it in  book--I’ve only got one volume--but I reckon I can piece it out
from memory.  I’ll just walk up  down a minute,  see if I can call
it back from recollection’s vaults.”

So he went to marching up  down, thinking,  frowning horrible
every now  n; n he would hoist up his eyebrows; next he would
squeeze his h on his forehead  stagger back  kind of moan; next
he would sigh,  next he’d let on to drop a tear.  It was beautiful
to see him. By  by he got it.  He told us to give attention.  n
he strikes a most noble attitude, with one leg shoved forwards,  his
arms stretched away up,  his head tilted back, looking up at  sky;
 n he begins to rip  rave  grit his teeth;  after that,
all through his speech, he howled,  spread around,  swelled up his
chest,  just knocked  spots out of any acting ever I see before.
 This is  speech--I learned it, easy enough, while he was learning it
to  king:

To be, or not to be; that is  bare bodkin That makes calamity of
so long life; For who would fardels bear, till Birnam Wood do come
to Dunsinane, But that  fear of something after death Murders 
innocent sleep, Great nature’s second course,  makes us rar sling
 arrows of outrageous fortune Than fly to ors that we know not of.
re’s  respect must give us pause: Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I
would thou couldst; For who would bear  whips  scorns of time, 
oppressor’s wrong,  proud man’s contumely,  law’s delay,  
quietus which his pangs might take. In  dead waste  middle of 
night, when churchyards yawn In customary suits of solemn black, But
that  undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns,
Breas forth contagion on  world,  thus  native hue of
resolution, like  poor cat i’  adage, Is sicklied o’er with care.
 all  clouds that lowered o’er our housetops, With this
regard ir currents turn awry,  lose  name of action. ‘Tis a
consummation devoutly to be wished. But soft you,  fair Ophelia: Ope
not thy ponderous  marble jaws. But get e to a nunnery&mdash;go!

Well,  old man he liked that speech,  he mighty soon got it so he
could do it first rate. It seemed like he was just born for it;  when
he had his h in  was excited, it was perfectly lovely  way he
would rip  tear  rair up behind when he was getting it off.

 first chance we got,  duke he had some show bills printed; 
after that, for two or three days as we floated along,  raft was a
most uncommon lively place, for re warn’t nothing but sword-fighting
 rehearsing--as  duke called it--going on all  time. One morning,
when we was pretty well down  State of Arkansaw, we come in sight
of a little one-horse town in a big bend; so we tied up about
three-quarters of a mile above it, in  mouth of a crick which was
shut in like a tunnel by  cypress trees,  all of us but Jim took
 canoe  went down re to see if re was any chance in that
place for our show.

We struck it mighty lucky; re was going to be a circus re that
afternoon,   country people was already beginning to come in, in
all kinds of old shackly wagons,  on horses.  circus would leave
before night, so our show would have a pretty good chance.  duke he
hired  court house,  we went around  stuck up our bills. y
read like this:

Shaksperean Revival!!!

Wonderful Attraction!

For One Night Only!  world renowned tragedians,

David Garrick  younger, of Drury Lane atre, London,



Edmund Kean  elder, of  Royal Haymarket atre, Whitechapel,
Pudding Lane, Piccadilly, London,   Royal Continental atres, in
ir sublime Shaksperean Spectacle entitled  Balcony Scene in

Romeo  Juliet!!!

Romeo...................................... Mr. Garrick.

Juliet..................................... Mr. Kean.

Assisted by  whole strength of  company!

New costumes, new scenery, new appointments!

Also:

 thrilling, masterly,  blood-curdling Broad-sword conflict In
Richard III.!!!

Richard III................................ Mr. Garrick.

Richmond................................... Mr. Kean.

also:

(by special request,)

Hamlet’s Immortal Soliloquy!!

By  Illustrious Kean!

Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris!

For One Night Only,

On account of imperative European engagements!

Admission 25 cents; children  servants, 10 cents.

n we went loafing around  town.  stores  houses was most all
old shackly dried-up frame concerns that hadn’t ever been painted; y
was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts, so as to be out of
reach of  water when  river was overflowed.  houses had little
gardens around m, but y didn’t seem to raise hardly anything in
m but jimpson weeds,  sunflowers,  ash-piles,  old curled-up
boots  shoes,  pieces of bottles,  rags,  played-out
tin-ware.  fences was made of different kinds of boards, nailed on
at different times;  y leaned every which-way,  had gates that
didn’t generly have but one hinge--a lear one. Some of  fences
had been whitewashed, some time or anor, but  duke said it was in
Clumbus’s time, like enough. re was generly hogs in  garden, 
people driving m out.

All  stores was along one street.  y had white domestic awnings in
front,   country people hitched ir horses to  awning-posts.
re was empty drygoods boxes under  awnings,  loafers roosting
on m all day long, whittling m with ir Barlow knives; 
chawing tobacco,  gaping  yawning  stretching--a mighty ornery
lot. y generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an umbrella,
but didn’t wear no coats nor waistcoats, y called one anor Bill,
 Buck,  Hank,  Joe,  y,  talked lazy  drawly, 
used considerable many cuss words.  re was as many as one loafer
leaning up against every awning-post,  he most always had his hs
in his britches-pockets, except when he fetched m out to lend a chaw
of tobacco or scratch.  What a body was hearing amongst m all 
time was:

“Gimme a chaw ‘v tobacker, Hank.”

“Cain’t; I hain’t got but one chaw left.  Ask Bill.”

Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw; maybe he lies  says he ain’t got
none. Some of m kinds of loafers never has a cent in  world, nor a
chaw of tobacco of ir own.  y get all ir chawing by borrowing;
y say to a fellow, “I wisht you’d len’ me a chaw, Jack, I jist this
minute give Ben Thompson  last chaw I had”--which is a lie pretty
much everytime; it don’t fool nobody but a stranger; but Jack ain’t no
stranger, so he says:

“_You_ give him a chaw, did you?  So did your sister’s cat’s
grmor. You pay me back  chaws you’ve awready borry’d off’n me,
Lafe Buckner, n I’ll loan you one or two ton of it,  won’t charge
you no back intrust, nur.”

“Well, I _did_ pay you back some of it wunst.”

“Yes, you did--‘bout six chaws.  You borry’d store tobacker  paid back
nigger-head.”

Store tobacco is flat black plug, but se fellows mostly chaws 
natural leaf twisted.  When y borrow a chaw y don’t generly cut it
off with a knife, but set  plug in between ir teeth,  gnaw with
ir teeth  tug at  plug with ir hs till y get it in
two; n sometimes  one that owns  tobacco looks mournful at it
when it’s hed back,  says, sarcastic:

“Here, gimme  _chaw_,  you take  _plug_.”

All  streets  lanes was just mud; y warn’t nothing else _but_
mud--mud as black as tar  nigh about a foot deep in some places,
 two or three inches deep in _all_  places.   hogs loafed 
grunted around everywheres.  You’d see a muddy sow  a litter of pigs
come lazying along  street  whollop herself right down in  way,
where folks had to walk around her,  she’d stretch out  shut her
eyes  wave her ears whilst  pigs was milking her,  look as
happy as if she was on salary.  pretty soon you’d hear a loafer
sing out, “Hi!  _so_ boy! sick him, Tige!”  away  sow would go,
squealing most horrible, with a dog or two swinging to each ear, 
three or four dozen more a-coming;  n you would see all 
loafers get up  watch  thing out of sight,  laugh at  fun
 look grateful for  noise.  n y’d settle back again till
re was a dog fight.  re couldn’t anything wake m up all over,
 make m happy all over, like a dog fight--unless it might be
putting turpentine on a stray dog  setting fire to him, or tying a
tin pan to his tail  see him run himself to death.

On  river front some of  houses was sticking out over  bank,
 y was bowed  bent,  about ready to tumble in.  people
had moved out of m.   bank was caved away under one corner of some
ors,  that corner was hanging over.  People lived in m yet, but
it was dangersome, because sometimes a strip of l as wide as a house
caves in at a time.  Sometimes a belt of l a quarter of a mile deep
will start in  cave along  cave along till it all caves into 
river in one summer. Such a town as that has to be always moving back,
 back,  back, because  river’s always gnawing at it.

 nearer it got to noon that day  thicker  thicker was 
wagons  horses in  streets,  more coming all  time.
 Families fetched ir dinners with m from  country,  eat m
in  wagons.  re was considerable whisky drinking going on,  I
seen three fights.  By  by somebody sings out:

“Here comes old Boggs!--in from  country for his little old monthly
drunk; here he comes, boys!”

All  loafers looked glad; I reckoned y was used to having fun out
of Boggs.  One of m says:

“Wonder who he’s a-gwyne to chaw up this time.  If he’d a-chawed up all
 men he’s ben a-gwyne to chaw up in  last twenty year he’d have
considerable ruputation now.”

Anor one says, “I wisht old Boggs ‘d threaten me, ‘cuz n I’d know
I warn’t gwyne to die for a thousan’ year.”

Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse, whooping  yelling like an
Injun,  singing out:

“Cler  track, thar.  I’m on  waw-path,   price uv coffins is
a-gwyne to raise.”

He was drunk,  weaving about in his saddle; he was over fifty year
old,  had a very red face.  Everybody yelled at him  laughed at
him  sassed him,  he sassed back,  said he’d attend to m 
lay m out in ir regular turns, but he couldn’t wait now because
he’d come to town to kill old Colonel Sherburn,  his motto was, “Meat
first,  spoon vittles to top off on.”

He see me,  rode up  says:

“Whar’d you come f’m, boy?  You prepared to die?”

n he rode on.  I was scared, but a man says:

“He don’t mean nothing; he’s always a-carryin’ on like that when he’s
drunk.  He’s  best naturedest old fool in Arkansaw--never hurt nobody,
drunk nor sober.”

Boggs rode up before  biggest store in town,  bent his head down
so he could see under  curtain of  awning  yells:

“Come out here, Sherburn! Come out  meet  man you’ve swindled.
You’re  houn’ I’m after,  I’m a-gwyne to have you, too!”

 so he went on, calling Sherburn everything he could lay his tongue
to,   whole street packed with people listening  laughing 
going on.  By  by a proud-looking man about fifty-five-- he was a
heap  best dressed man in that town, too--steps out of  store, 
 crowd drops back on each side to let him come.  He says to Boggs,
mighty ca’m  slow--he says:

“I’m tired of this, but I’ll endure it till one o’clock.  Till one
o’clock, mind--no longer.  If you open your mouth against me only once
after that time you can’t travel so far but I will find you.”

n he turns  goes in.   crowd looked mighty sober; nobody
stirred,  re warn’t no more laughing.  Boggs rode off
blackguarding Sherburn as loud as he could yell, all down  street;
 pretty soon back he comes  stops before  store, still keeping
it up.  Some men crowded around him  tried to get him to shut up,
but he wouldn’t; y told him it would be one o’clock in about fifteen
minutes,  so he _must_ go home--he must go right away.  But it didn’t
do no good.  He cussed away with all his might,  throwed his hat down
in  mud  rode over it,  pretty soon away he went a-raging down
 street again, with his gray hair a-flying. Everybody that could get
a chance at him tried ir best to coax him off of his horse so y
could lock him up  get him sober; but it warn’t no use--up  street
he would tear again,  give Sherburn anor cussing.  By  by
somebody says:

“Go for his daughter!--quick, go for his daughter; sometimes he’ll listen
to her.  If anybody can persuade him, she can.”

So somebody started on a run.  I walked down street a ways  stopped.
In about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again, but not on his
horse.  He was a-reeling across  street towards me, bare-headed, with
a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms  hurrying him along.
He was quiet,  looked uneasy;  he warn’t hanging back any, but was
doing some of  hurrying himself.  Somebody sings out:

“Boggs!”

I looked over re to see who said it,  it was that Colonel
Sherburn. He was sting perfectly still in  street,  had a
pistol raised in his right h--not aiming it, but holding it out with
 barrel tilted up towards  sky.   same second I see a young
girl coming on  run,  two men with her.  Boggs   men turned
round to see who called him,  when y see  pistol  men
jumped to one side,   pistol-barrel come down slow  steady to
a level--both barrels cocked. Boggs throws up both of his hs  says,
“O Lord, don’t shoot!”  Bang! goes  first shot,  he staggers back,
clawing at  air--bang! goes  second one,  he tumbles backwards
on to  ground, heavy  solid, with his arms spread out.  That young
girl screamed out  comes rushing,  down she throws herself on her
far, crying,  saying, “Oh, he’s killed him, he’s killed him!”  
crowd closed up around m,  shouldered  jammed one anor, with
ir necks stretched, trying to see,  people on  inside trying to
shove m back  shouting, “Back, back! give him air, give him air!”

Colonel Sherburn he tossed his pistol on to  ground,  turned
around on his heels  walked off.

y took Boggs to a little drug store,  crowd pressing around just
 same,   whole town following,  I rushed  got a good
place at  window, where I was close to him  could see in.  y
laid him on  floor  put one large Bible under his head,  opened
anor one  spread it on his breast; but y tore open his shirt
first,  I seen where one of  bullets went in.  He made about a
dozen long gasps, his breast lifting  Bible up when he drawed in his
breath,  letting it down again when he bread it out-- after that
he laid still; he was dead.  n y pulled his daughter away from
him, screaming  crying,  took her off.  She was about sixteen, 
very sweet  gentle looking, but awful pale  scared.

Well, pretty soon  whole town was re, squirming  scrouging 
pushing  shoving to get at  window  have a look, but people
that had  places wouldn’t give m up,  folks behind m was
saying all  time, “Say, now, you’ve looked enough, you fellows;
‘tain’t right  ‘tain’t fair for you to stay thar all  time, 
never give nobody a chance; or folks has ir rights as well as
you.”

re was considerable jawing back, so I slid out, thinking maybe
re was going to be trouble.   streets was full,  everybody was
excited. Everybody that seen  shooting was telling how it happened,
 re was a big crowd packed around each one of se fellows,
stretching ir necks  listening.  One long, lanky man, with long
hair  a big white fur stovepipe hat on  back of his head,  a
crooked-hled cane, marked out  places on  ground where Boggs
stood  where Sherburn stood,   people following him around from
one place to t’or  watching everything he done,  bobbing ir
heads to show y understood,  stooping a little  resting ir
hs on ir thighs to watch him mark  places on  ground with
his cane;  n he stood up straight  stiff where Sherburn had
stood, frowning  having his hat-brim down over his eyes,  sung
out, “Boggs!”  n fetched his cane down slow to a level,  says
“Bang!” staggered backwards, says “Bang!” again,  fell down flat on
his back.  people that had seen  thing said he done it perfect;
said it was just exactly  way it all happened.  n as much as a
dozen people got out ir bottles  treated him.

Well, by  by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched.  In about a
minute everybody was saying it; so away y went, mad  yelling, 
snatching down every clos-line y come to to do  hanging with.




CHAPTER XXII.

Y swarmed up towards Sherburn’s house, a-whooping  raging like
Injuns,  everything had to clear  way or get run over  tromped
to mush,  it was awful to see.  Children was heeling it ahead of 
mob, screaming  trying to get out of  way;  every window along
 road was full of women’s heads,  re was nigger boys in every
tree,  bucks  wenches looking over every fence;  as soon as 
mob would get nearly to m y would break  skaddle back out of
reach.  Lots of  women  girls was crying  taking on, scared
most to death.

y swarmed up in front of Sherburn’s palings as thick as y could
jam toger,  you couldn’t hear yourself think for  noise.  It
was a little twenty-foot yard.  Some sung out “Tear down  fence! tear
down  fence!”  n re was a racket of ripping  tearing 
smashing,  down she goes,   front wall of  crowd begins to
roll in like a wave.

Just n Sherburn steps out on to  roof of his little front porch,
with a double-barrel gun in his h,  takes his st, perfectly
ca’m  deliberate, not saying a word.   racket stopped,  
wave sucked back.

Sherburn never said a word--just stood re, looking down.  
stillness was awful creepy  uncomfortable.  Sherburn run his eye slow
along  crowd;  wherever it struck  people tried a little to
out-gaze him, but y couldn’t; y dropped ir eyes  looked
sneaky. n pretty soon Sherburn sort of laughed; not  pleasant
kind, but  kind that makes you feel like when you are eating bread
that’s got s in it.

n he says, slow  scornful:

“ idea of _you_ lynching anybody!  It’s amusing.   idea of you
thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a _man_!  Because you’re brave
enough to tar  fear poor friendless cast-out women that come along
here, did that make you think you had grit enough to lay your hs on a
_man_?  Why, a _man’s_ safe in  hs of ten thous of your kind--as
long as it’s daytime  you’re not behind him.

“Do I know you?  I know you clear through. I was born  raised in 
South,  I’ve lived in  North; so I know  average all around.
 average man’s a coward.  In  North he lets anybody walk over him
that wants to,  goes home  prays for a humble spirit to bear it.
In  South one man all by himself, has stopped a stage full of men
in  daytime,  robbed  lot.  Your newspapers call you a
brave people so much that you think you are braver than any or
people--whereas you’re just _as_ brave,  no braver.  Why don’t your
juries hang murderers?  Because y’re afraid  man’s friends will
shoot m in  back, in  dark-- it’s just what y _would_ do.

“So y always acquit;  n a _man_ goes in  night, with a
hundred masked cowards at his back  lynches  rascal.  Your mistake
is, that you didn’t bring a man with you; that’s one mistake,  
or is that you didn’t come in  dark  fetch your masks.  You
brought _part_ of a man--Buck Harkness, re-- if you hadn’t had him
to start you, you’d a taken it out in blowing.

“You didn’t want to come.   average man don’t like trouble 
danger. _You_ don’t like trouble  danger.  But if only _half_ a
man--like Buck Harkness, re--shouts ‘Lynch him! lynch him!’ you’re
afraid to back down--afraid you’ll be found out to be what you
are--_cowards_-- so you raise a yell,  hang yourselves on to that
half-a-man’s coat-tail,  come raging up here, swearing what big
things you’re going to do.  pitifulest thing out is a mob; that’s
what an army is--a mob; y don’t fight with courage that’s born in
m, but with courage that’s borrowed from ir mass,  from ir
officers.  But a mob without any _man_ at  head of it is _beneath_
pitifulness.  Now  thing for _you_ to do is to droop your tails 
go home  crawl in a hole.  If any real lynching’s going to be done it
will be done in  dark, Sourn fashion;  when y come y’ll
bring ir masks,  fetch a _man_ along.  Now _leave_-- take your
half-a-man with you”--tossing his gun up across his left arm  cocking
it when he says this.

 crowd washed back sudden,  n broke all apart,  went tearing
off every which way,  Buck Harkness he heeled it after m, looking
tolerable cheap.  I could a stayed if I wanted to, but I didn’t want to.

I went to  circus  loafed around  back side till  watchman
went by,  n dived in under  tent.  I had my twenty-dollar gold
piece  some or money, but I reckoned I better save it, because
re ain’t no telling how soon you are going to need it, away from
home  amongst strangers that way.  You can’t be too careful.  I ain’t
opposed to spending money on circuses when re ain’t no or way, but
re ain’t no use in _wasting_ it on m.

It was a real bully circus.  It was  splendidest sight that ever was
when y all come riding in, two  two, a gentleman  lady, side
by side,  men just in ir drawers  undershirts,  no shoes
nor stirrups,  resting ir hs on ir thighs easy 
comfortable--re must a been twenty of m-- every lady with a
lovely complexion,  perfectly beautiful,  looking just like a gang
of real sure-enough queens,  dressed in clos that cost millions of
dollars,  just littered with diamonds.  It was a powerful fine sight;
I never see anything so lovely.   n one by one y got up
 stood,  went a-weaving around  ring so gentle  wavy 
graceful,  men looking ever so tall  airy  straight, with ir
heads bobbing  skimming along, away up re under  tent-roof, 
every lady’s rose-leafy dress flapping soft  silky around her hips,
 she looking like  most loveliest parasol.

 n faster  faster y went, all of m dancing, first one
foot out in  air  n  or,  horses leaning more 
more,   ringmaster going round  round  center-pole, cracking
his whip  shouting “Hi!--hi!”   clown cracking jokes behind
him;  by  by all hs dropped  reins,  every lady put her
knuckles on her hips  every gentleman folded his arms,  n how
 horses did lean over  hump mselves!   so one after 
or y all skipped off into  ring,  made  sweetest bow I
ever see,  n scampered out,  everybody clapped ir hs 
went just about wild.

Well, all through  circus y done  most astonishing things; 
all  time that clown carried on so it most killed  people.  
ringmaster couldn’t ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick
as a wink with  funniest things a body ever said;  how he ever
_could_ think of so many of m,  so sudden  so pat, was what I
couldn’t noway underst. Why, I couldn’t a thought of m in a year.
 by  by a drunk man tried to get into  ring--said he wanted to
ride; said he could ride as well as anybody that ever was.  y argued
 tried to keep him out, but he wouldn’t listen,   whole show
come to a ststill.  n  people begun to holler at him  make
fun of him,  that made him mad,  he begun to rip  tear; so that
stirred up  people,  a lot of men begun to pile down off of 
benches  swarm towards  ring, saying, “Knock him down! throw him
out!”  one or two women begun to scream.  So, n,  ringmaster
he made a little speech,  said he hoped re wouldn’t be no
disturbance,  if  man would promise he wouldn’t make no more
trouble he would let him ride if he thought he could stay on  horse.
 So everybody laughed  said all right,   man got on.  minute
he was on,  horse begun to rip  tear  jump  cavort around,
with two circus men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him,  
drunk man hanging on to his neck,  his heels flying in  air every
jump,   whole crowd of people sting up shouting  laughing
till tears rolled down.   at last, sure enough, all  circus men
could do,  horse broke loose,  away he went like  very nation,
round  round  ring, with that sot laying down on him  hanging
to his neck, with first one leg hanging most to  ground on one side,
 n t’or one on t’or side,   people just crazy.  It
warn’t funny to me, though; I was all of a tremble to see his danger.
 But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle  grabbed  bridle,
a-reeling this way  that;   next minute he sprung up 
dropped  bridle  stood!   horse a-going like a house afire
too.  He just stood up re, a-sailing around as easy  comfortable
as if he warn’t ever drunk in his life-- n he begun to pull off his
clos  sling m.  He shed m so thick y kind of clogged up
 air,  altoger he shed seventeen suits. , n, re he
was, slim  hsome,  dressed  gaudiest  prettiest you
ever saw,  he lit into that horse with his whip  made him fairly
hum-- finally skipped off,  made his bow  danced off to
 dressing-room,  everybody just a-howling with pleasure 
astonishment.

n  ringmaster he see how he had been fooled,  he _was_ 
sickest ringmaster you ever see, I reckon.  Why, it was one of his own
men!  He had got up that joke all out of his own head,  never let on
to nobody. Well, I felt sheepish enough to be took in so, but I wouldn’t
a been in that ringmaster’s place, not for a thous dollars.  I don’t
know; re may be bullier circuses than what that one was, but I
never struck m yet. Anyways, it was plenty good enough for _me_; 
wherever I run across it, it can have all of _my_ custom every time.

Well, that night we had _our_ show; but re warn’t only about twelve
people re--just enough to pay expenses.   y laughed all 
time,  that made  duke mad;  everybody left, anyway, before
 show was over, but one boy which was asleep.  So  duke said se
Arkansaw lunkheads couldn’t come up to Shakespeare; what y wanted
was low comedy-- maybe something rur worse than low comedy, he
reckoned.  He said he could size ir style.  So next morning he got
some big sheets of wrapping paper  some black paint,  drawed off
some hbills,  stuck m up all over  village.   bills said:




CHAPTER XXIII.

WELL, all day him   king was hard at it, rigging up a stage 
a curtain  a row of cles for footlights;  that night  house
was jam full of men in no time.  When  place couldn’t hold no more,
 duke he quit tending door  went around  back way  come on
to  stage  stood up before  curtain  made a little speech,
 praised up this tragedy,  said it was  most thrillingest one
that ever was;  so he went on a-bragging about  tragedy,  about
Edmund Kean  Elder, which was to play  main principal part in it;
 at last when he’d got everybody’s expectations up high enough, he
rolled up  curtain,   next minute  king come a-prancing
out on all fours, naked;  he was painted all over,
ring-streaked--striped, all sorts of colors, as splendid as a
rainbow.  --but never mind  rest of his outfit; it was just wild,
but it was awful funny.  people most killed mselves laughing; 
when  king got done capering  capered off behind  scenes, y
roared  clapped  stormed  haw-hawed till he come back  done
it over again,  after that y made him do it anor time. Well, it
would make a cow laugh to see  shines that old idiot cut.

n  duke he lets  curtain down,  bows to  people,  says
 great tragedy will be performed only two nights more, on accounts of
pressing London engagements, where  seats is all sold already for it
in Drury Lane;  n he makes m anor bow,  says if he has
succeeded in pleasing m  instructing m, he will be deeply
obleeged if y will mention it to ir friends  get m to come
 see it.

Twenty people sings out:

“What, is it over?  Is that _all_?”

 duke says yes.  n re was a fine time.  Everybody sings
out, “Sold!”  rose up mad,  was a-going for that stage  m
tragedians.  But a big, fine looking man jumps up on a bench  shouts:

“Hold on!  Just a word, gentlemen.”  y stopped to listen.  “We are
sold--mighty badly sold.  But we don’t want to be  laughing stock of
this whole town, I reckon,  never hear  last of this thing as long
as we live.  _No_.  What we want is to go out of here quiet,  talk
this show up,  sell  _rest_ of  town!  n we’ll all be in 
same boat.  Ain’t that sensible?” (“You bet it is!-- jedge is right!”
 everybody sings out.) “All right, n--not a word about any sell.  Go
along home,  advise everybody to come  see  tragedy.”

Next day you couldn’t hear nothing around that town but how splendid
that show was.  House was jammed again that night,  we sold this
crowd  same way.  When me   king   duke got home to 
raft we all had a supper;  by  by, about midnight, y made Jim
 me back her out  float her down  middle of  river, 
fetch her in  hide her about two mile below town.

 third night  house was crammed again-- y warn’t new-comers
this time, but people that was at  show  or two nights.  I
stood by  duke at  door,  I see that every man that went in had
his pockets bulging, or something muffled up under his coat-- I see it
warn’t no perfumery, neir, not by a long sight.  I smelt sickly eggs
by  barrel,  rotten cabbages,  such things;  if I know 
signs of a dead cat being around,  I bet I do, re was sixty-four
of m went in.  I shoved in re for a minute, but it was too various
for me; I couldn’t st it.  Well, when  place couldn’t hold no more
people  duke he give a fellow a quarter  told him to tend door
for him a minute,  n he started around for  stage door, I after
him; but  minute we turned  corner  was in  dark he says:

“Walk fast now till you get away from  houses,  n shin for 
raft like  dickens was after you!”

I done it,  he done  same.  We struck  raft at  same time,
 in less than two seconds we was gliding down stream, all dark 
still,  edging towards  middle of  river, nobody saying a
word. I reckoned  poor king was in for a gaudy time of it with 
audience, but nothing of  sort; pretty soon he crawls out from under
 wigwam,  says:

“Well, how’d  old thing pan out this time, duke?”  He hadn’t been
up-town at all.

We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below  village.
n we lit up  had a supper,   king   duke fairly
laughed ir bones loose over  way y’d served m people.  
duke says:

“Greenhorns, flaads!  I knew  first house would keep mum  let
 rest of  town get roped in;  I knew y’d lay for us 
third night,  consider it was _ir_ turn now.  Well, it _is_ ir
turn,  I’d give something to know how much y’d take for it.  I
_would_ just like to know how y’re putting in ir opportunity.
 y can turn it into a picnic if y want to--y brought plenty
provisions.”

m rapscallions took in four hundred  sixty-five dollars in that
three nights.  I never see money hauled in by  wagon-load like that
before.  By  by, when y was asleep  snoring, Jim says:

“Don’t it s’prise you de way dem kings carries on, Huck?”

“No,” I says, “it don’t.”

“Why don’t it, Huck?”

“Well, it don’t, because it’s in  breed.  I reckon y’re all
alike.”

“But, Huck, dese kings o’ ourn is reglar rapscallions; dat’s jist what
dey is; dey’s reglar rapscallions.”

“Well, that’s what I’m a-saying; all kings is mostly rapscallions, as
fur as I can make out.”

“Is dat so?”

“You read about m once--you’ll see.  Look at Henry  Eight; this ‘n
‘s a Sunday-school Superintendent to _him_.   look at Charles Second,
 Louis Fourteen,  Louis Fifteen,  James Second,  Edward
Second,  Richard Third,  forty more; besides all m Saxon
heptarchies that used to rip around so in old times  raise Cain.  My,
you ought to seen old Henry  Eight when he was in bloom.  He _was_ a
blossom.  He used to marry a new wife every day,  chop off her head
next morning.   he would do it just as indifferent as if he was
ordering up eggs.  ‘Fetch up Nell Gwynn,’ he says.  y fetch her up.
Next morning, ‘Chop off her head!’   y chop it off.  ‘Fetch up
Jane Shore,’ he says;  up she comes, Next morning, ‘Chop off her
head’-- y chop it off.  ‘Ring up Fair Rosamun.’  Fair Rosamun
answers  bell.  Next morning, ‘Chop off her head.’   he made every
one of m tell him a tale every night;  he kept that up till he had
hogged a thous  one tales that way,  n he put m all in a
book,  called it Domesday Book--which was a good name  stated 
case.  You don’t know kings, Jim, but I know m;  this old rip
of ourn is one of  cleanest I’ve struck in history.  Well, Henry he
takes a notion he wants to get up some trouble with this country. How
does he go at it--give notice?--give  country a show?  No.  All of a
sudden he heaves all  tea in Boston Harbor overboard,  whacks
out a declaration of independence,  dares m to come on.  That was
_his_ style--he never give anybody a chance.  He had suspicions of his
far,  Duke of Wellington.  Well, what did he do?  Ask him to show
up?  No--drownded him in a butt of mamsey, like a cat.  S’pose people
left money laying around where he was--what did he do?  He collared it.
 S’pose he contracted to do a thing,  you paid him,  didn’t set
down re  see that he done it--what did he do?  He always done 
or thing. S’pose he opened his mouth--what n?  If he didn’t shut it
up powerful quick he’d lose a lie every time.  That’s  kind of a bug
Henry was;  if we’d a had him along ‘stead of our kings he’d a fooled
that town a heap worse than ourn done.  I don’t say that ourn is lambs,
because y ain’t, when you come right down to  cold facts; but y
ain’t nothing to _that_ old ram, anyway.  All I say is, kings is kings,
 you got to make allowances.  Take m all around, y’re a mighty
ornery lot. It’s  way y’re raised.”

“But dis one do _smell_ so like de nation, Huck.”

“Well, y all do, Jim.  We can’t help  way a king smells; history
don’t tell no way.”

“Now de duke, he’s a tolerble likely man in some ways.”

“Yes, a duke’s different.  But not very different.  This one’s
a middling hard lot for a duke.  When he’s drunk re ain’t no
near-sighted man could tell him from a king.”

“Well, anyways, I doan’ hanker for no mo’ un um, Huck.  Dese is all I
kin stan’.”

“It’s  way I feel, too, Jim.  But we’ve got m on our hs,  we
got to remember what y are,  make allowances.  Sometimes I wish we
could hear of a country that’s out of kings.”

What was  use to tell Jim se warn’t real kings  dukes?  It
wouldn’t a done no good; , besides, it was just as I said:  you
couldn’t tell m from  real kind.

I went to sleep,  Jim didn’t call me when it was my turn.  He often
done that.  When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting re with
his head down betwixt his knees, moaning  mourning to himself.  I
didn’t take notice nor let on.  I knowed what it was about.  He was
thinking about his wife  his children, away up yonder,  he was low
 homesick; because he hadn’t ever been away from home before in his
life;  I do believe he cared just as much for his people as white
folks does for ir’n.  It don’t seem natural, but I reckon it’s so.
 He was often moaning  mourning that way nights, when he judged I
was asleep,  saying, “Po’ little ‘Lizabeth! po’ little Johnny! it’s
mighty hard; I spec’ I ain’t ever gwyne to see you no mo’, no mo’!”  He
was a mighty good nigger, Jim was.

But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his wife  young
ones;  by  by he says:

“What makes me feel so bad dis time ‘uz bekase I hear sumpn over yonder
on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while ago, en it mine me er de time
I treat my little ‘Lizabeth so ornery.  She warn’t on’y ‘bout fo’ year
ole, en she tuck de sk’yarlet fever, en had a powful rough spell; but
she got well, en one day she was a-stannin’ aroun’, en I says to her, I
says:

“‘Shet de do’.’

“She never done it; jis’ stood dah, kiner smilin’ up at me.  It make me
mad; en I says agin, mighty loud, I says:

“‘Doan’ you hear me?  Shet de do’!’

“She jis stood de same way, kiner smilin’ up.  I was a-bilin’!  I says:

“‘I lay I _make_ you mine!’

“En wid dat I fetch’ her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin’.
Den I went into de yur room, en ‘uz gone ‘bout ten minutes; en when
I come back dah was dat do’ a-stannin’ open _yit_, en dat chile stannin’
mos’ right in it, a-lookin’ down  mournin’, en de tears runnin’ down.
 My, but I _wuz_ mad!  I was a-gwyne for de chile, but jis’ den--it was a
do’ dat open innerds--jis’ den, ‘long come de wind en slam it to, behine
de chile, ker-BLAM!--en my lan’, de chile never move’!  My breff mos’
hop outer me; en I feel so--so--I doan’ know HOW I feel.  I crope out,
all a-tremblin’, en crope aroun’ en open de do’ easy en slow, en poke my
head in behine de chile, sof’ en still, en all uv a sudden I says POW!
jis’ as loud as I could yell.  _She never budge!_  Oh, Huck, I bust out
a-cryin’ en grab her up in my arms, en say, ‘Oh, de po’ little thing!
 De Lord God Amighty fogive po’ ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne to fogive
hisself as long’s he live!’  Oh, she was plumb deef en dumb, Huck, plumb
deef en dumb--en I’d ben a-treat’n her so!”




CHAPTER XXIV.

NEXT day, towards night, we laid up under a little willow towhead out in
 middle, where re was a village on each side of  river,  
duke   king begun to lay out a plan for working m towns.  Jim
he spoke to  duke,  said he hoped it wouldn’t take but a few
hours, because it got mighty heavy  tiresome to him when he had to
lay all day in  wigwam tied with  rope.  You see, when we left him
all alone we had to tie him, because if anybody happened on to him all
by himself  not tied it wouldn’t look much like he was a runaway
nigger, you know. So  duke said it _was_ kind of hard to have to lay
roped all day,  he’d cipher out some way to get around it.

He was uncommon bright,  duke was,  he soon struck it.  He dressed
Jim up in King Lear’s outfit--it was a long curtain-calico gown,  a
white horse-hair wig  whiskers;  n he took his ater paint
 painted Jim’s face  hs  ears  neck all over a dead,
dull, solid blue, like a man that’s been drownded nine days.  Blamed if
he warn’t  horriblest looking outrage I ever see.  n  duke took
 wrote out a sign on a shingle so:

Sick Arab--but harmless when not out of his head.

 he nailed that shingle to a lath,  stood  lath up four or five
foot in front of  wigwam.  Jim was satisfied.  He said it was a sight
better than lying tied a couple of years every day,  trembling all
over every time re was a sound.   duke told him to make himself
free  easy,  if anybody ever come meddling around, he must hop
out of  wigwam,  carry on a little,  fetch a howl or two like
a wild beast,  he reckoned y would light out  leave him alone.
 Which was sound enough judgment; but you take  average man,  he
wouldn’t wait for him to howl.  Why, he didn’t only look like he was
dead, he looked considerable more than that.

se rapscallions wanted to try  Nonesuch again, because re was
so much money in it, but y judged it wouldn’t be safe, because maybe
 news might a worked along down by this time.  y couldn’t hit no
project that suited exactly; so at last  duke said he reckoned he’d
lay off  work his brains an hour or two  see if he couldn’t put up
something on  Arkansaw village;   king he allowed he would drop
over to t’or village without any plan, but just trust in Providence
to lead him  profitable way--meaning  devil, I reckon.  We had all
bought store clos where we stopped last;  now  king put his’n
on,  he told me to put mine on.  I done it, of course.   king’s
duds was all black,  he did look real swell  starchy.  I never
knowed how clos could change a body before.  Why, before, he looked
like  orneriest old rip that ever was; but now, when he’d take off
his new white beaver  make a bow  do a smile, he looked that gr
 good  pious that you’d say he had walked right out of  ark,
 maybe was old Leviticus himself.  Jim cleaned up  canoe,  I
got my paddle ready.  re was a big steamboat laying at  shore away
up under  point, about three mile above  town--been re a couple
of hours, taking on freight.  Says  king:

“Seein’ how I’m dressed, I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St.
Louis or Cincinnati, or some or big place.  Go for  steamboat,
Huckleberry; we’ll come down to  village on her.”

I didn’t have to be ordered twice to go  take a steamboat ride.
 I fetched  shore a half a mile above  village,  n went
scooting along  bluff bank in  easy water.  Pretty soon we come to
a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing 
sweat off of his face, for it was powerful warm wear;  he had a
couple of big carpet-bags by him.

“Run her nose in shore,” says  king.  I done it.  “Wher’ you bound
for, young man?”

“For  steamboat; going to Orleans.”

“Git aboard,” says  king.  “Hold on a minute, my servant ‘ll he’p you
with m bags.  Jump out  he’p  gentleman, Adolphus”--meaning me,
I see.

I done so,  n we all three started on again.   young chap was
mighty thankful; said it was tough work toting his baggage such wear.
He asked  king where he was going,   king told him he’d come
down  river  led at  or village this morning,  now he
was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up re.  
young fellow says:

“When I first see you I says to myself, ‘It’s Mr. Wilks, sure,  he
come mighty near getting here in time.’  But n I says again, ‘No, I
reckon it ain’t him, or else he wouldn’t be paddling up  river.’  You
_ain’t_ him, are you?”

“No, my name’s Blodgett--Elexer Blodgett--_Reverend_ Elexer
Blodgett, I s’pose I must say, as I’m one o’  Lord’s poor servants.
 But still I’m jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not arriving
in time, all  same, if he’s missed anything by it--which I hope he
hasn’t.”

“Well, he don’t miss any property by it, because he’ll get that all
right; but he’s missed seeing his bror Peter die--which he mayn’t
mind, nobody can tell as to that--but his bror would a give anything
in this world to see _him_ before he died; never talked about nothing
else all se three weeks; hadn’t seen him since y was boys
toger-- hadn’t ever seen his bror William at all--that’s  deef
 dumb one--William ain’t more than thirty or thirty-five.  Peter 
George were  only ones that come out here; George was  married
bror; him  his wife both died last year.  Harvey  William’s 
only ones that’s left now; , as I was saying, y haven’t got here
in time.”

“Did anybody send ‘em word?”

“Oh, yes; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took; because Peter
said n that he sorter felt like he warn’t going to get well this
time. You see, he was pretty old,  George’s g’yirls was too young to
be much company for him, except Mary Jane,  red-headed one;  so he
was kinder lonesome after George  his wife died,  didn’t seem
to care much to live.  He most desperately wanted to see Harvey--
William, too, for that matter--because he was one of m kind that can’t
bear to make a will.  He left a letter behind for Harvey,  said he’d
told in it where his money was hid,  how he wanted  rest of 
property divided up so George’s g’yirls would be all right--for George
didn’t leave nothing.   that letter was all y could get him to put
a pen to.”

“Why do you reckon Harvey don’t come?  Wher’ does he live?”

“Oh, he lives in Engl--Sheffield--preaches re--hasn’t ever been in
this country.  He hasn’t had any too much time-- besides he mightn’t a
got  letter at all, you know.”

“Too bad, too bad he couldn’t a lived to see his brors, poor soul.
You going to Orleans, you say?”

“Yes, but that ain’t only a part of it.  I’m going in a ship, next
Wednesday, for Ryo Janeero, where my uncle lives.”

“It’s a pretty long journey.  But it’ll be lovely; wisht I was a-going.
Is Mary Jane  oldest?  How old is  ors?”

“Mary Jane’s nineteen, Susan’s fifteen,  Joanna’s about
fourteen--that’s  one that gives herself to good works  has a
hare-lip.”

“Poor things! to be left alone in  cold world so.”

“Well, y could be worse off.  Old Peter had friends,  y
ain’t going to let m come to no harm.  re’s Hobson,  Babtis’
preacher;  Deacon Lot Hovey,  Ben Rucker,  Abner Shackleford,
 Levi Bell,  lawyer;  Dr. Robinson,  ir wives,  
widow Bartley, --well, re’s a lot of m; but se are  ones
that Peter was thickest with,  used to write about sometimes, when
he wrote home; so Harvey ‘ll know where to look for friends when he gets
here.”

Well,  old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied
that young fellow.  Blamed if he didn’t inquire about everybody 
everything in that blessed town,  all about  Wilkses;  about
Peter’s business--which was a tanner;  about George’s--which was a
carpenter;  about Harvey’s--which was a dissentering minister;  so
on,  so on.  n he says:

“What did you want to walk all  way up to  steamboat for?”

“Because she’s a big Orleans boat,  I was afeard she mightn’t stop
re.  When y’re deep y won’t stop for a hail.  A Cincinnati boat
will, but this is a St. Louis one.”

“Was Peter Wilks well off?”

“Oh, yes, pretty well off.  He had houses  l,  it’s reckoned he
left three or four thous in cash hid up som’ers.”

“When did you say he died?”

“I didn’t say, but it was last night.”

“Funeral to-morrow, likely?”

“Yes, ‘bout  middle of  day.”

“Well, it’s all terrible sad; but we’ve all got to go, one time or
anor. So what we want to do is to be prepared; n we’re all right.”

“Yes, sir, it’s  best way.  Ma used to always say that.”

When we struck  boat she was about done loading,  pretty soon she
got off.   king never said nothing about going aboard, so I lost
my ride, after all.  When  boat was gone  king made me paddle up
anor mile to a lonesome place,  n he got ashore  says:

“Now hustle back, right off,  fetch  duke up here,   new
carpet-bags.   if he’s gone over to t’or side, go over re 
git him.   tell him to git himself up regardless.  Shove along, now.”

I see what _he_ was up to; but I never said nothing, of course.  When
I got back with  duke we hid  canoe,  n y set down on a
log,   king told him everything, just like  young fellow had
said it--every last word of it.   all  time he was a-doing it he
tried to talk like an Englishman;  he done it pretty well, too, for
a slouch. I can’t imitate him,  so I ain’t a-going to try to; but he
really done it pretty good.  n he says:

“How are you on  deef  dumb, Bilgewater?”

 duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had played a deef
 dumb person on  histronic boards.  So n y waited for a
steamboat.

About  middle of  afternoon a couple of little boats come along,
but y didn’t come from high enough up  river; but at last re
was a big one,  y hailed her.  She sent out her yawl,  we went
aboard,  she was from Cincinnati;  when y found we only wanted
to go four or five mile y was booming mad,  gave us a cussing, 
said y wouldn’t l us.  But  king was ca’m.  He says:

“If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on 
put off in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to carry ‘em, can’t it?”

So y softened down  said it was all right;  when we got to 
village y yawled us ashore.  About two dozen men flocked down when
y see  yawl a-coming,  when  king says:

“Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher’ Mr. Peter Wilks lives?” y
give a glance at one anor,  nodded ir heads, as much as to say,
“What d’ I tell you?”  n one of m says, kind of soft  gentle:

“I’m sorry sir, but  best we can do is to tell you where he _did_
live yesterday evening.”

Sudden as winking  ornery old cretur went an to smash,  fell up
against  man,  put his chin on his shoulder,  cried down his
back,  says:

“Alas, alas, our poor bror--gone,  we never got to see him; oh,
it’s too, too hard!”

n he turns around, blubbering,  makes a lot of idiotic signs to
 duke on his hs,  blamed if he didn’t drop a carpet-bag 
bust out a-crying.  If y warn’t  beatenest lot, m two frauds,
that ever I struck.

Well,  men gared around  sympathized with m,  said all
sorts of kind things to m,  carried ir carpet-bags up  hill
for m,  let m lean on m  cry,  told  king all about
his bror’s last moments,   king he told it all over again on
his hs to  duke,  both of m took on about that dead tanner
like y’d lost  twelve disciples.  Well, if ever I struck anything
like it, I’m a nigger. It was enough to make a body ashamed of  human
race.




CHAPTER XXV.

 news was all over town in two minutes,  you could see  people
tearing down on  run from every which way, some of m putting on
ir coats as y come.  Pretty soon we was in  middle of a crowd,
  noise of  tramping was like a soldier march.   windows 
dooryards was full;  every minute somebody would say, over a fence:

“Is it _m_?”

 somebody trotting along with  gang would answer back  say:

“You bet it is.”

When we got to  house  street in front of it was packed,  
three girls was sting in  door.  Mary Jane _was_ red-headed, but
that don’t make no difference, she was most awful beautiful,  her
face  her eyes was all lit up like glory, she was so glad her uncles
was come.  king he spread his arms,  Mary Jane she jumped for
m,   hare-lip jumped for  duke,  re y had it!
 Everybody most, leastways women, cried for joy to see m meet again
at last  have such good times.

n  king he hunched  duke private--I see him do it-- n he
looked around  see  coffin, over in  corner on two chairs; so
n him   duke, with a h across each or’s shoulder, 
t’or h to ir eyes, walked slow  solemn over re, everybody
dropping back to give m room,  all  talk  noise stopping,
people saying “Sh!”  all  men taking ir hats off  drooping
ir heads, so you could a heard a pin fall.   when y got re
y bent over  looked in  coffin,  took one sight,  n
y bust out a-crying so you could a heard m to Orleans, most; 
n y put ir arms around each or’s necks,  hung ir chins
over each or’s shoulders;  n for three minutes, or maybe four,
I never see two men leak  way y done.  , mind you, everybody
was doing  same;   place was that damp I never see anything
like it. n one of m got on one side of  coffin,  t’or on
t’or side,  y kneeled down  rested ir foreheads on 
coffin,  let on to pray all to mselves.  Well, when it come
to that it worked  crowd like you never see anything like it, 
everybody broke down  went to sobbing right out loud-- poor girls,
too;  every woman, nearly, went up to  girls, without saying a
word,  kissed m, solemn, on  forehead,  n put ir h
on ir head,  looked up towards  sky, with  tears running
down,  n busted out  went off sobbing  swabbing,  give
 next woman a show.  I never see anything so disgusting.

Well, by  by  king he gets up  comes forward a little, 
works himself up  slobbers out a speech, all full of tears 
flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him  his poor bror
to lose  diseased,  to miss seeing diseased alive after  long
journey of four thous mile, but it’s a trial that’s sweetened 
sanctified to us by this dear sympathy  se holy tears,  so he
thanks m out of his heart  out of his bror’s heart, because out
of ir mouths y can’t, words being too weak  cold,  all that
kind of rot  slush, till it was just sickening;  n he blubbers
out a pious goody-goody Amen,  turns himself loose  goes to crying
fit to bust.

  minute  words were out of his mouth somebody over in 
crowd struck up  doxolojer,  everybody joined in with all ir
might,  it just warmed you up  made you feel as good as church
letting out. Music is a good thing;  after all that soul-butter 
hogwash I never see it freshen up things so,  sound so honest 
bully.

n  king begins to work his jaw again,  says how him  his
nieces would be glad if a few of  main principal friends of 
family would take supper here with m this evening,  help set up
with  ashes of  diseased;  says if his poor bror laying
yonder could speak he knows who he would name, for y was names that
was very dear to him,  mentioned often in his letters;  so he will
name  same, to wit, as follows, vizz.:--Rev. Mr. Hobson,  Deacon
Lot Hovey,  Mr. Ben Rucker,  Abner Shackleford,  Levi Bell, 
Dr. Robinson,  ir wives,   widow Bartley.

Rev. Hobson  Dr. Robinson was down to  end of  town a-hunting
toger--that is, I mean  doctor was shipping a sick man to t’or
world,   preacher was pinting him right.  Lawyer Bell was away up
to Louisville on business.  But  rest was on h,  so y all
come  shook hs with  king  thanked him  talked to him;
 n y shook hs with  duke  didn’t say nothing, but just
kept a-smiling  bobbing ir heads like a passel of sapheads whilst
he made all sorts of signs with his hs  said “Goo-goo--goo-goo-goo”
 all  time, like a baby that can’t talk.

So  king he blattered along,  managed to inquire about pretty
much everybody  dog in town, by his name,  mentioned all sorts
of little things that happened one time or anor in  town, or to
George’s family, or to Peter.   he always let on that Peter wrote him
 things; but that was a lie:  he got every blessed one of m out of
that young flaad that we canoed up to  steamboat.

n Mary Jane she fetched  letter her far left behind,  
king he read it out loud  cried over it.  It give  dwelling-house
 three thous dollars, gold, to  girls;  it give  tanyard
(which was doing a good business), along with some or houses 
l (worth about seven thous),  three thous dollars in gold
to Harvey  William,  told where  six thous cash was hid down
cellar.  So se two frauds said y’d go  fetch it up,  have
everything square  above-board;  told me to come with a cle.
 We shut  cellar door behind us,  when y found  bag
y spilt it out on  floor,  it was a lovely sight, all m
yaller-boys.  My,  way  king’s eyes did shine!  He slaps  duke
on  shoulder  says:

“Oh, _this_ ain’t bully nor noth’n!  Oh, no, I reckon not!  Why,
_bully_, it beats  Nonesuch, _don’t_ it?”

 duke allowed it did.  y pawed  yaller-boys,  sifted m
through ir fingers  let m jingle down on  floor;  
king says:

“It ain’t no use talkin’; bein’ brors to a rich dead man 
representatives of furrin heirs that’s got left is  line for you 
me, Bilge.  Thish yer comes of trust’n to Providence.  It’s  best
way, in  long run.  I’ve tried ‘em all,  r’ ain’t no better
way.”

Most everybody would a been satisfied with  pile,  took it on
trust; but no, y must count it.  So y counts it,  it comes out
four hundred  fifteen dollars short.  Says  king:

“Dern him, I wonder what he done with that four hundred  fifteen
dollars?”

y worried over that awhile,  ransacked all around for it.  n
 duke says:

“Well, he was a pretty sick man,  likely he made a mistake--I reckon
that’s  way of it.   best way’s to let it go,  keep still about
it.  We can spare it.”

“Oh, shucks, yes, we can _spare_ it.  I don’t k’yer noth’n ‘bout
that--it’s  _count_ I’m thinkin’ about.  We want to be awful square
 open  above-board here, you know.  We want to lug this h-yer
money up stairs  count it before everybody--n r’ ain’t noth’n
suspicious.  But when  dead man says r’s six thous’n dollars, you
know, we don’t want to--”

“Hold on,” says  duke.  “Le’s make up  deffisit,”  he begun to
haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket.

“It’s a most amaz’n’ good idea, duke--you _have_ got a rattlin’ clever
head on you,” says  king.  “Blest if  old Nonesuch ain’t a heppin’
us out agin,”  _he_ begun to haul out yaller-jackets  stack m
up.

It most busted m, but y made up  six thous clean  clear.

“Say,” says  duke, “I got anor idea.  Le’s go up stairs  count
this money,  n take  _give it to  girls_.”

“Good l, duke, lemme hug you!  It’s  most dazzling idea ‘at ever a
man struck.  You have cert’nly got  most astonishin’ head I ever see.
Oh, this is  boss dodge, r’ ain’t no mistake ‘bout it.  Let ‘em
fetch along ir suspicions now if y want to--this ‘ll lay ‘em out.”

When we got up-stairs everybody gered around  table,   king
he counted it  stacked it up, three hundred dollars in a pile--twenty
elegant little piles.  Everybody looked hungry at it,  licked ir
chops.  n y raked it into  bag again,  I see  king begin
to swell himself up for anor speech.  He says:

“Friends all, my poor bror that lays yonder has done generous by
m that’s left behind in  vale of sorrers.  He has done generous by
se yer poor little lambs that he loved  sheltered,  that’s left
farless  morless.  Yes,  we that knowed him knows that he
would a done _more_ generous by ‘em if he hadn’t ben afeard o’ woundin’
his dear William  me.  Now, _wouldn’t_ he?  r’ ain’t no question
‘bout it in _my_ mind.  Well, n, what kind o’ brors would it be
that ‘d st in his way at sech a time?   what kind o’ uncles would
it be that ‘d rob--yes, _rob_--sech poor sweet lambs as se ‘at he loved
so at sech a time?  If I know William-- I _think_ I do--he--well, I’ll
jest ask him.” He turns around  begins to make a lot of signs to
 duke with his hs,   duke he looks at him stupid 
lear-headed a while; n all of a sudden he seems to catch his
meaning,  jumps for  king, goo-gooing with all his might for joy,
 hugs him about fifteen times before he lets up.  n  king says,
“I knowed it; I reckon _that ‘ll_ convince anybody  way _he_ feels
about it.  Here, Mary Jane, Susan, Joanner, take  money--take it
_all_.  It’s  gift of him that lays yonder, cold but joyful.”

Mary Jane she went for him, Susan   hare-lip went for 
duke,  n such anor hugging  kissing I never see yet.  
everybody crowded up with  tears in ir eyes,  most shook 
hs off of m frauds, saying all  time:

“You _dear_ good souls!--how _lovely_!--how _could_ you!”

Well, n, pretty soon all hs got to talking about  diseased
again,  how good he was,  what a loss he was,  all that; 
before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in re from outside,
 stood a-listening  looking,  not saying anything;  nobody
saying anything to him eir, because  king was talking  y was
all busy listening.   king was saying--in  middle of something he’d
started in on--

“--y bein’ partickler friends o’  diseased.  That’s why y’re
invited here this evenin’; but tomorrow we want _all_ to come--everybody;
for he respected everybody, he liked everybody,  so it’s fitten that
his funeral orgies sh’d be public.”

 so he went a-mooning on  on, liking to hear himself talk, 
every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again, till  duke
he couldn’t st it no more; so he writes on a little scrap of paper,
“_Obsequies_, you old fool,”  folds it up,  goes to goo-gooing 
reaching it over people’s heads to him.   king he reads it  puts
it in his pocket,  says:

“Poor William, afflicted as he is, his _heart’s_ aluz right.  Asks me
to invite everybody to come to  funeral--wants me to make ‘em all
welcome.  But he needn’t a worried--it was jest what I was at.”

n he weaves along again, perfectly ca’m,  goes to dropping in his
funeral orgies again every now  n, just like he done before.  
when he done it  third time he says:

“I say orgies, not because it’s  common term, because it
ain’t--obsequies bein’  common term--but because orgies is  right
term. Obsequies ain’t used in Engl no more now--it’s gone out.  We
say orgies now in Engl.  Orgies is better, because it means  thing
you’re after more exact.  It’s a word that’s made up out’n  Greek
_orgo_, outside, open, abroad;   Hebrew _jeesum_, to plant, cover
up; hence in_ter._  So, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public
funeral.”

He was  _worst_ I ever struck.  Well,  iron-jawed man he laughed
right in his face.  Everybody was shocked.  Everybody says, “Why,
_doctor_!”  Abner Shackleford says:

“Why, Robinson, hain’t you heard  news?  This is Harvey Wilks.”

 king he smiled eager,  shoved out his flapper,  says:

“Is it my poor bror’s dear good friend  physician?  I--”

“Keep your hs off of me!” says  doctor.  “_You_ talk like an
Englishman, _don’t_ you?  It’s  worst imitation I ever heard.  _You_
Peter Wilks’s bror!  You’re a fraud, that’s what you are!”

Well, how y all took on!  y crowded around  doctor  tried to
quiet him down,  tried to explain to him  tell him how Harvey ‘d
showed in forty ways that he _was_ Harvey,  knowed everybody by name,
  names of  very dogs,  begged  _begged_ him not to hurt
Harvey’s feelings   poor girl’s feelings,  all that.  But it
warn’t no use; he stormed right along,  said any man that pretended
to be an Englishman  couldn’t imitate  lingo no better than what
he did was a fraud  a liar.   poor girls was hanging to  king
 crying;  all of a sudden  doctor ups  turns on _m_.  He
says:

“I was your far’s friend,  I’m your friend;  I warn you as a
friend,  an honest one that wants to protect you  keep you out of
harm  trouble, to turn your backs on that scoundrel  have nothing
to do with him,  ignorant tramp, with his idiotic Greek  Hebrew,
as he calls it.  He is  thinnest kind of an impostor--has come here
with a lot of empty names  facts which he picked up somewheres, 
you take m for _proofs_,  are helped to fool yourselves by se
foolish friends here, who ought to know better.  Mary Jane Wilks, you
know me for your friend,  for your unselfish friend, too.  Now listen
to me; turn this pitiful rascal out--I _beg_ you to do it.  Will you?”

Mary Jane straightened herself up,  my, but she was hsome!  She
says:

“_Here_ is my answer.”  She hove up  bag of money  put it in 
king’s hs,  says, “Take this six thous dollars,  invest for
me  my sisters any way you want to,  don’t give us no receipt for
it.”

n she put her arm around  king on one side,  Susan  
hare-lip done  same on  or.  Everybody clapped ir hs 
stomped on  floor like a perfect storm, whilst  king held up his
head  smiled proud.   doctor says:

“All right; I wash _my_ hs of  matter.  But I warn you all that a
time ‘s coming when you’re going to feel sick whenever you think of this
day.”  away he went.

“All right, doctor,” says  king, kinder mocking him; “we’ll try 
get ‘em to send for you;” which made m all laugh,  y said it
was a prime good hit.




CHAPTER XXVI.

WELL, when y was all gone  king he asks Mary Jane how y was off
for spare rooms,  she said she had one spare room, which would do for
Uncle William,  she’d give her own room to Uncle Harvey, which was
a little bigger,  she would turn into  room with her sisters 
sleep on a cot;  up garret was a little cubby, with a pallet in it.
 king said  cubby would do for his valley--meaning me.

So Mary Jane took us up,  she showed m ir rooms, which was
plain but nice.  She said she’d have her frocks  a lot of or traps
took out of her room if y was in Uncle Harvey’s way, but he said
y warn’t.   frocks was hung along  wall,  before m was
a curtain made out of calico that hung down to  floor.  re was an
old hair trunk in one corner,  a guitar-box in anor,  all sorts
of little knickknacks  jimcracks around, like girls brisken up a room
with.   king said it was all  more homely  more pleasanter for
se fixings,  so don’t disturb m.   duke’s room was pretty
small, but plenty good enough,  so was my cubby.

That night y had a big supper,  all m men  women was re,
 I stood behind  king   duke’s chairs  waited on m,
  niggers waited on  rest.  Mary Jane she set at  head of
 table, with Susan alongside of her,  said how bad  biscuits
was,  how mean  preserves was,  how ornery  tough  fried
chickens was-- all that kind of rot,  way women always do for to
force out compliments;   people all knowed everything was tiptop,
 said so--said “How _do_ you get biscuits to brown so nice?” 
“Where, for  l’s sake, _did_ you get se amaz’n pickles?” 
all that kind of humbug talky-talk, just  way people always does at a
supper, you know.

 when it was all done me   hare-lip had supper in  kitchen
off of  leavings, whilst  ors was helping  niggers clean up
 things.   hare-lip she got to pumping me about Engl,  blest
if I didn’t think  ice was getting mighty thin sometimes.  She says:

“Did you ever see  king?”

“Who?  William Fourth?  Well, I bet I have--he goes to our church.”  I
knowed he was dead years ago, but I never let on.  So when I says he
goes to our church, she says:

“What--regular?”

“Yes--regular.  His pew’s right over opposite ourn--on t’or side 
pulpit.”

“I thought he lived in London?”

“Well, he does.  Where _would_ he live?”

“But I thought _you_ lived in Sheffield?”

I see I was up a stump.  I had to let on to get choked with a chicken
bone, so as to get time to think how to get down again.  n I says:

“I mean he goes to our church regular when he’s in Sheffield.  That’s
only in  summer time, when he comes re to take  sea baths.”

“Why, how you talk--Sheffield ain’t on  sea.”

“Well, who said it was?”

“Why, you did.”

“I _didn’t_ nur.”

“You did!”

“I didn’t.”

“You did.”

“I never said nothing of  kind.”

“Well, what _did_ you say, n?”

“Said he come to take  sea _baths_--that’s what I said.”

“Well, n, how’s he going to take  sea baths if it ain’t on 
sea?”

“Looky here,” I says; “did you ever see any Congress-water?”

“Yes.”

“Well, did you have to go to Congress to get it?”

“Why, no.”

“Well, neir does William Fourth have to go to  sea to get a sea
bath.”

“How does he get it, n?”

“Gets it  way people down here gets Congress-water--in barrels.  re
in  palace at Sheffield y’ve got furnaces,  he wants his water
hot.  y can’t bile that amount of water away off re at  sea.
y haven’t got no conveniences for it.”

“Oh, I see, now.  You might a said that in  first place  saved
time.”

When she said that I see I was out of  woods again,  so I was
comfortable  glad.  Next, she says:

“Do you go to church, too?”

“Yes--regular.”

“Where do you set?”

“Why, in our pew.”

“_Whose_ pew?”

“Why, _ourn_--your Uncle Harvey’s.”

“His’n?  What does _he_ want with a pew?”

“Wants it to set in.  What did you _reckon_ he wanted with it?”

“Why, I thought he’d be in  pulpit.”

Rot him, I forgot he was a preacher.  I see I was up a stump again, so I
played anor chicken bone  got anor think.  n I says:

“Blame it, do you suppose re ain’t but one preacher to a church?”

“Why, what do y want with more?”

“What!--to preach before a king?  I never did see such a girl as you.
y don’t have no less than seventeen.”

“Seventeen!  My l!  Why, I wouldn’t set out such a string as that,
not if I _never_ got to glory.  It must take ‘em a week.”

“Shucks, y don’t _all_ of ‘em preach  same day--only _one_ of ‘em.”

“Well, n, what does  rest of ‘em do?”

“Oh, nothing much.  Loll around, pass  plate-- one thing or
anor.  But mainly y don’t do nothing.”

“Well, n, what are y _for_?”

“Why, y’re for _style_.  Don’t you know nothing?”

“Well, I don’t _want_ to know no such foolishness as that.  How is
servants treated in Engl?  Do y treat ‘em better ‘n we treat our
niggers?”

“_No_!  A servant ain’t nobody re.  y treat m worse than dogs.”

“Don’t y give ‘em holidays,  way we do, Christmas  New Year’s
week,  Fourth of July?”

“Oh, just listen!  A body could tell _you_ hain’t ever been to Engl
by that.  Why, Hare-l--why, Joanna, y never see a holiday from year’s
end to year’s end; never go to  circus, nor ater, nor nigger
shows, nor nowheres.”

“Nor church?”

“Nor church.”

“But _you_ always went to church.”

Well, I was gone up again.  I forgot I was  old man’s servant.  But
next minute I whirled in on a kind of an explanation how a valley was
different from a common servant  _had_ to go to church wher he
wanted to or not,  set with  family, on account of its being 
law.  But I didn’t do it pretty good,  when I got done I see she
warn’t satisfied.  She says:

“Honest injun, now, hain’t you been telling me a lot of lies?”

“Honest injun,” says I.

“None of it at all?”

“None of it at all.  Not a lie in it,” says I.

“Lay your h on this book  say it.”

I see it warn’t nothing but a dictionary, so I laid my h on it 
said it.  So n she looked a little better satisfied,  says:

“Well, n, I’ll believe some of it; but I hope to gracious if I’ll
believe  rest.”

“What is it you won’t believe, Joe?” says Mary Jane, stepping in with
Susan behind her.  “It ain’t right nor kind for you to talk so to him,
 him a stranger  so far from his people.  How would you like to be
treated so?”

“That’s always your way, Maim--always sailing in to help somebody before
y’re hurt.  I hain’t done nothing to him.  He’s told some stretchers,
I reckon,  I said I wouldn’t swallow it all;  that’s every bit
 grain I _did_ say.  I reckon he can st a little thing like that,
can’t he?”

“I don’t care wher ‘twas little or wher ‘twas big; he’s here in
our house  a stranger,  it wasn’t good of you to say it.  If you
was in his place it would make you feel ashamed;  so you oughtn’t to
say a thing to anor person that will make _m_ feel ashamed.”

“Why, Mam, he said--”

“It don’t make no difference what he _said_--that ain’t  thing.  
thing is for you to treat him _kind_,  not be saying things to make
him remember he ain’t in his own country  amongst his own folks.”

I says to myself, _this_ is a girl that I’m letting that old reptile rob
her of her money!

n Susan _she_ waltzed in;  if you’ll believe me, she did give
Hare-lip hark from  tomb!

Says I to myself,  this is _anor_ one that I’m letting him rob her
of her money!

n Mary Jane she took anor inning,  went in sweet  lovely
again--which was her way; but when she got done re warn’t hardly
anything left o’ poor Hare-lip.  So she hollered.

“All right, n,” says  or girls; “you just ask his pardon.”

She done it, too;  she done it beautiful.  She done it so beautiful
it was good to hear;  I wished I could tell her a thous lies, so
she could do it again.

I says to myself, this is _anor_ one that I’m letting him rob her of
her money.   when she got through y all jest laid irselves
out to make me feel at home  know I was amongst friends.  I felt so
ornery  low down  mean that I says to myself, my mind’s made up;
I’ll hive that money for m or bust.

So n I lit out--for bed, I said, meaning some time or anor.  When
I got by myself I went to thinking  thing over.  I says to myself,
shall I go to that doctor, private,  blow on se frauds?  No--that
won’t do. He might tell who told him; n  king   duke would
make it warm for me.  Shall I go, private,  tell Mary Jane?  No--I
dasn’t do it. Her face would give m a hint, sure; y’ve got 
money,  y’d slide right out  get away with it.  If she was to
fetch in help I’d get mixed up in  business before it was done with,
I judge.  No; re ain’t no good way but one.  I got to steal that
money, somehow;  I got to steal it some way that y won’t suspicion
that I done it. y’ve got a good thing here,  y ain’t a-going
to leave till y’ve played this family  this town for all y’re
worth, so I’ll find a chance time enough. I’ll steal it  hide it; 
by  by, when I’m away down  river, I’ll write a letter  tell
Mary Jane where it’s hid.  But I better hive it tonight if I can,
because  doctor maybe hasn’t let up as much as he lets on he has; he
might scare m out of here yet.

So, thinks I, I’ll go  search m rooms.  Upstairs  hall was
dark, but I found  duke’s room,  started to paw around it with
my hs; but I recollected it wouldn’t be much like  king to let
anybody else take care of that money but his own self; so n I went to
his room  begun to paw around re.  But I see I couldn’t do nothing
without a cle,  I dasn’t light one, of course.  So I judged I’d
got to do  or thing--lay for m  eavesdrop.  About that time
I hears ir footsteps coming,  was going to skip under  bed; I
reached for it, but it wasn’t where I thought it would be; but I touched
 curtain that hid Mary Jane’s frocks, so I jumped in behind that 
snuggled in amongst  gowns,  stood re perfectly still.

y come in  shut  door;   first thing  duke done was to
get down  look under  bed.  n I was glad I hadn’t found  bed
when I wanted it.   yet, you know, it’s kind of natural to hide under
 bed when you are up to anything private.  y sets down n, 
 king says:

“Well, what is it?   cut it middlin’ short, because it’s better for
us to be down re a-whoopin’ up  mournin’ than up here givin’ ‘em a
chance to talk us over.”

“Well, this is it, Capet.  I ain’t easy; I ain’t comfortable.  That
doctor lays on my mind.  I wanted to know your plans.  I’ve got a
notion,  I think it’s a sound one.”

“What is it, duke?”

“That we better glide out of this before three in  morning,  clip
it down  river with what we’ve got.  Specially, seeing we got it so
easy--_given_ back to us, flung at our heads, as you may say, when of
course we allowed to have to steal it back.  I’m for knocking off 
lighting out.”

That made me feel pretty bad.  About an hour or two ago it would a been
a little different, but now it made me feel bad  disappointed, 
king rips out  says:

“What!   not sell out  rest o’  property?  March off like
a passel of fools  leave eight or nine thous’n’ dollars’ worth o’
property layin’ around jest sufferin’ to be scooped in?-- all good,
salable stuff, too.”

 duke he grumbled; said  bag of gold was enough,  he didn’t
want to go no deeper--didn’t want to rob a lot of orphans of _everything_
y had.

“Why, how you talk!” says  king.  “We sha’n’t rob ‘em of nothing at
all but jest this money.   people that _buys_  property is 
suff’rers; because as soon ‘s it’s found out ‘at we didn’t own it--which
won’t be long after we’ve slid-- sale won’t be valid,  it ‘ll all
go back to  estate.  se yer orphans ‘ll git ir house back agin,
 that’s enough for _m_; y’re young  spry,  k’n easy
earn a livin’.  _y_ ain’t a-goin to suffer.  Why, jest think--re’s
thous’n’s  thous’n’s that ain’t nigh so well off.  Bless you, _y_
ain’t got noth’n’ to complain of.”

Well,  king he talked him blind; so at last he give in,  said all
right, but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay,  that
doctor hanging over m.  But  king says:

“Cuss  doctor!  What do we k’yer for _him_?  Hain’t we got all 
fools in town on our side?   ain’t that a big enough majority in any
town?”

So y got ready to go down stairs again.   duke says:

“I don’t think we put that money in a good place.”

That cheered me up.  I’d begun to think I warn’t going to get a hint of
no kind to help me.   king says:

“Why?”

“Because Mary Jane ‘ll be in mourning from this out;  first you know
 nigger that does up  rooms will get an order to box se duds
up  put ‘em away;  do you reckon a nigger can run across money 
not borrow some of it?”

“Your head’s level agin, duke,” says  king;  he comes a-fumbling
under  curtain two or three foot from where I was.  I stuck tight to
 wall  kept mighty still, though quivery;  I wondered what m
fellows would say to me if y catched me;  I tried to think what
I’d better do if y did catch me.  But  king he got  bag before
I could think more than about a half a thought,  he never suspicioned
I was around.  y took  shoved  bag through a rip in  straw
tick that was under  fear-bed,  crammed it in a foot or two
amongst  straw  said it was all right now, because a nigger only
makes up  fear-bed,  don’t turn over  straw tick only about
twice a year,  so it warn’t in no danger of getting stole now.

But I knowed better.  I had it out of re before y was half-way
down stairs.  I groped along up to my cubby,  hid it re till I
could get a chance to do better.  I judged I better hide it outside
of  house somewheres, because if y missed it y would give 
house a good ransacking:  I knowed that very well.  n I turned in,
with my clos all on; but I couldn’t a gone to sleep if I’d a wanted
to, I was in such a sweat to get through with  business.  By  by I
heard  king   duke come up; so I rolled off my pallet  laid
with my chin at  top of my ladder,  waited to see if anything was
going to happen.  But nothing did.

So I held on till all  late sounds had quit   early ones hadn’t
begun yet;  n I slipped down  ladder.




CHAPTER XXVII.

I crept to ir doors  listened; y was snoring.  So I tiptoed
along,  got down stairs all right.  re warn’t a sound anywheres.
 I peeped through a crack of  dining-room door,  see  men that
was watching  corpse all sound asleep on ir chairs.   door
was open into  parlor, where  corpse was laying,  re was a
cle in both rooms. I passed along,   parlor door was open; but
I see re warn’t nobody in re but  remainders of Peter; so I
shoved on by; but  front door was locked,   key wasn’t re.
 Just n I heard somebody coming down  stairs, back behind me.  I
run in  parlor  took a swift look around,   only place I
see to hide  bag was in  coffin.   lid was shoved along about
a foot, showing  dead man’s face down in re, with a wet cloth over
it,  his shroud on.  I tucked  money-bag in under  lid, just
down beyond where his hs was crossed, which made me creep, y was
so cold,  n I run back across  room  in behind  door.

 person coming was Mary Jane.  She went to  coffin, very soft, 
kneeled down  looked in; n she put up her hkerchief,  I see
she begun to cry, though I couldn’t hear her,  her back was to me.  I
slid out,  as I passed  dining-room I thought I’d make sure m
watchers hadn’t seen me; so I looked through  crack,  everything
was all right.  y hadn’t stirred.

I slipped up to bed, feeling rur blue, on accounts of  thing
playing out that way after I had took so much trouble  run so much
resk about it.  Says I, if it could stay where it is, all right; because
when we get down  river a hundred mile or two I could write back to
Mary Jane,  she could dig him up again  get it; but that ain’t 
thing that’s going to happen;  thing that’s going to happen is, 
money ‘ll be found when y come to screw on  lid.  n  king
‘ll get it again,  it ‘ll be a long day before he gives anybody
anor chance to smouch it from him. Of course I _wanted_ to slide
down  get it out of re, but I dasn’t try it.  Every minute it was
getting earlier now,  pretty soon some of m watchers would begin
to stir,  I might get catched--catched with six thous dollars in my
hs that nobody hadn’t hired me to take care of.  I don’t wish to be
mixed up in no such business as that, I says to myself.

When I got down stairs in  morning  parlor was shut up,  
watchers was gone.  re warn’t nobody around but  family  
widow Bartley  our tribe.  I watched ir faces to see if anything
had been happening, but I couldn’t tell.

Towards  middle of  day  undertaker come with his man,  y
set  coffin in  middle of  room on a couple of chairs,  n
set all our chairs in rows,  borrowed more from  neighbors till
 hall   parlor   dining-room was full.  I see  coffin
lid was  way it was before, but I dasn’t go to look in under it, with
folks around.

n  people begun to flock in,   beats   girls took
seats in  front row at  head of  coffin,  for a half an hour
 people filed around slow, in single rank,  looked down at 
dead man’s face a minute,  some dropped in a tear,  it was
all very still  solemn, only  girls   beats holding
hkerchiefs to ir eyes  keeping ir heads bent,  sobbing a
little.  re warn’t no or sound but  scraping of  feet on
 floor  blowing noses--because people always blows m more at a
funeral than y do at or places except church.

When  place was packed full  undertaker he slid around in his
black gloves with his softy sooring ways, putting on  last
touches,  getting people  things all ship-shape  comfortable,
 making no more sound than a cat.  He never spoke; he moved people
around, he squeezed in late ones, he opened up passageways,  done
it with nods,  signs with his hs.  n he took his place over
against  wall. He was  softest, glidingest, stealthiest man I ever
see;  re warn’t no more smile to him than re is to a ham.

y had borrowed a melodeum--a sick one;  when everything was ready
a young woman set down  worked it,  it was pretty skreeky 
colicky,  everybody joined in  sung,  Peter was  only one
that had a good thing, according to my notion.  n  Reverend Hobson
opened up, slow  solemn,  begun to talk;  straight off  most
outrageous row busted out in  cellar a body ever heard; it was only
one dog, but he made a most powerful racket,  he kept it up right
along;  parson he had to st re, over  coffin,  wait--you
couldn’t hear yourself think.  It was right down awkward,  nobody
didn’t seem to know what to do.  But pretty soon y see that
long-legged undertaker make a sign to  preacher as much as to say,
“Don’t you worry--just depend on me.”  n he stooped down  begun
to glide along  wall, just his shoulders showing over  people’s
heads.  So he glided along,   powwow  racket getting more 
more outrageous all  time;  at last, when he had gone around two
sides of  room, he disappears down cellar.  n in about two seconds
we heard a whack,   dog he finished up with a most amazing howl or
two,  n everything was dead still,   parson begun his solemn
talk where he left off.  In a minute or two here comes this undertaker’s
back  shoulders gliding along  wall again;  so he glided 
glided around three sides of  room,  n rose up,  shaded his
mouth with his hs,  stretched his neck out towards  preacher,
over  people’s heads,  says, in a kind of a coarse whisper, “_He
had a rat_!”  n he drooped down  glided along  wall again to
his place.  You could see it was a great satisfaction to  people,
because naturally y wanted to know.  A little thing like that don’t
cost nothing,  it’s just  little things that makes a man to be
looked up to  liked.  re warn’t no more popular man in town than
what that undertaker was.

Well,  funeral sermon was very good, but pison long  tiresome; 
n  king he shoved in  got off some of his usual rubbage, 
at last  job was through,   undertaker begun to sneak up on 
coffin with his screw-driver.  I was in a sweat n,  watched him
pretty keen. But he never meddled at all; just slid  lid along as
soft as mush,  screwed it down tight  fast.  So re I was!  I
didn’t know wher  money was in re or not.  So, says I, s’pose
somebody has hogged that bag on  sly?--now how do I know wher
to write to Mary Jane or not? S’pose she dug him up  didn’t find
nothing, what would she think of me? Blame it, I says, I might get
hunted up  jailed; I’d better lay low  keep dark,  not write at
all;  thing’s awful mixed now; trying to better it, I’ve worsened it
a hundred times,  I wish to goodness I’d just let it alone, dad fetch
 whole business!

y buried him,  we come back home,  I went to watching faces
again--I couldn’t help it,  I couldn’t rest easy.  But nothing come of
it;  faces didn’t tell me nothing.

 king he visited around in  evening,  sweetened everybody up,
 made himself ever so friendly;  he give out  idea that his
congregation over in Engl would be in a sweat about him, so he must
hurry  settle up  estate right away  leave for home.  He was
very sorry he was so pushed,  so was everybody; y wished he could
stay longer, but y said y could see it couldn’t be done.   he
said of course him  William would take  girls home with m; 
that pleased everybody too, because n  girls would be well fixed
 amongst ir own relations;  it pleased  girls, too--tickled
m so y clean forgot y ever had a trouble in  world;  told
him to sell out as quick as he wanted to, y would be ready.  m
poor things was that glad  happy it made my heart ache to see m
getting fooled  lied to so, but I didn’t see no safe way for me to
chip in  change  general tune.

Well, blamed if  king didn’t bill  house   niggers  all
 property for auction straight off--sale two days after  funeral;
but anybody could buy private beforeh if y wanted to.

So  next day after  funeral, along about noon-time,  girls’ joy
got  first jolt.  A couple of nigger traders come along,   king
sold m  niggers reasonable, for three-day drafts as y called
it,  away y went,  two sons up  river to Memphis,  ir
mor down  river to Orleans.  I thought m poor girls  m
niggers would break ir hearts for grief; y cried around each
or,  took on so it most made me down sick to see it.   girls
said y hadn’t ever dreamed of seeing  family separated or sold
away from  town.  I can’t ever get it out of my memory,  sight of
m poor miserable girls  niggers hanging around each or’s necks
 crying;  I reckon I couldn’t a stood it all, but would a had
to bust out  tell on our gang if I hadn’t knowed  sale warn’t no
account   niggers would be back home in a week or two.

 thing made a big stir in  town, too,  a good many come out
flatfooted  said it was scalous to separate  mor  
children that way.  It injured  frauds some; but  old fool he
bulled right along, spite of all  duke could say or do,  I tell
you  duke was powerful uneasy.

Next day was auction day.  About broad day in  morning  king 
 duke come up in  garret  woke me up,  I see by ir look
that re was trouble.   king says:

“Was you in my room night before last?”

“No, your majesty”--which was  way I always called him when nobody but
our gang warn’t around.

“Was you in re yisterday er last night?”

“No, your majesty.”

“Honor bright, now--no lies.”

“Honor bright, your majesty, I’m telling you  truth.  I hain’t been
a-near your room since Miss Mary Jane took you   duke  showed
it to you.”

 duke says:

“Have you seen anybody else go in re?”

“No, your grace, not as I remember, I believe.”

“Stop  think.”

I studied awhile  see my chance; n I says:

“Well, I see  niggers go in re several times.”

Both of m gave a little jump,  looked like y hadn’t ever
expected it,  n like y _had_.  n  duke says:

“What, all of m?”

“No--leastways, not all at once--that is, I don’t think I ever see m
all come _out_ at once but just one time.”

“Hello!  When was that?”

“It was  day we had  funeral.  In  morning.  It warn’t early,
because I overslept.  I was just starting down  ladder,  I see
m.”

“Well, go on, _go_ on!  What did y do?  How’d y act?”

“y didn’t do nothing.   y didn’t act anyway much, as fur as I
see. y tiptoed away; so I seen, easy enough, that y’d shoved in
re to do up your majesty’s room, or something, s’posing you was up;
 found you _warn’t_ up,  so y was hoping to slide out of 
way of trouble without waking you up, if y hadn’t already waked you
up.”

“Great guns, _this_ is a go!” says  king;  both of m looked
pretty sick  tolerable silly.  y stood re a-thinking 
scratching ir heads a minute,   duke he bust into a kind of a
little raspy chuckle,  says:

“It does beat all how neat  niggers played ir h.  y let on
to be _sorry_ y was going out of this region!   I believed y
_was_ sorry,  so did you,  so did everybody.  Don’t ever tell _me_
any more that a nigger ain’t got any histrionic talent.  Why,  way
y played that thing it would fool _anybody_.  In my opinion, re’s
a fortune in ‘em.  If I had capital  a ater, I wouldn’t want a
better lay-out than that-- here we’ve gone  sold ‘em for a song.
 Yes,  ain’t privileged to sing  song yet.  Say, where _is_ that
song--that draft?”

“In  bank for to be collected.  Where _would_ it be?”

“Well, _that’s_ all right n, thank goodness.”

Says I, kind of timid-like:

“Is something gone wrong?”

 king whirls on me  rips out:

“None o’ your business!  You keep your head shet,  mind y’r own
affairs--if you got any.  Long as you’re in this town don’t you forgit
_that_--you hear?”  n he says to  duke, “We got to jest swaller it
 say noth’n’:  mum’s  word for _us_.”

As y was starting down  ladder  duke he chuckles again, 
says:

“Quick sales __ small profits!  It’s a good business--yes.”

 king snarls around on him  says:

“I was trying to do for  best in sellin’ ‘em out so quick.  If 
profits has turned out to be none, lackin’ considable,  none to
carry, is it my fault any more’n it’s yourn?”

“Well, _y’d_ be in this house yet  we _wouldn’t_ if I could a got
my advice listened to.”

 king sassed back as much as was safe for him,  n swapped
around  lit into _me_ again.  He give me down  banks for not
coming  _telling_ him I see  niggers come out of his room acting
that way--said any fool would a _knowed_ something was up.   n
waltzed in  cussed _himself_ awhile,  said it all come of him not
laying late  taking his natural rest that morning,  he’d be
blamed if he’d ever do it again.  So y went off a-jawing;  I felt
dreadful glad I’d worked it all off on to  niggers,  yet hadn’t
done  niggers no harm by it.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

BY  by it was getting-up time.  So I come down  ladder  started
for down-stairs; but as I come to  girls’ room  door was open, 
I see Mary Jane setting by her old hair trunk, which was open  she’d
been packing things in it--getting ready to go to Engl.  But she
had stopped now with a folded gown in her lap,  had her face in her
hs, crying.  I felt awful bad to see it; of course anybody would.  I
went in re  says:

“Miss Mary Jane, you can’t a-bear to see people in trouble,  I
can’t--most always.  Tell me about it.”

So she done it.   it was  niggers--I just expected it.  She said
 beautiful trip to Engl was most about spoiled for her; she didn’t
know _how_ she was ever going to be happy re, knowing  mor 
 children warn’t ever going to see each or no more-- n busted
out bitterer than ever,  flung up her hs,  says:

“Oh, dear, dear, to think y ain’t _ever_ going to see each or any
more!”

“But y _will_-- inside of two weeks-- I _know_ it!” says I.

Laws, it was out before I could think!   before I could budge she
throws her arms around my neck  told me to say it _again_, say it
_again_, say it _again_!

I see I had spoke too sudden  said too much,  was in a close
place. I asked her to let me think a minute;  she set re, very
impatient  excited  hsome, but looking kind of happy 
eased-up, like a person that’s had a tooth pulled out.  So I went to
studying it out.  I says to myself, I reckon a body that ups  tells
 truth when he is in a tight place is taking considerable many resks,
though I ain’t had no experience,  can’t say for certain; but it
looks so to me, anyway;  yet here’s a case where I’m blest if it
don’t look to me like  truth is better  actuly _safer_ than a lie.
 I must lay it by in my mind,  think it over some time or or, it’s
so kind of strange  unregular. I never see nothing like it.  Well, I
says to myself at last, I’m a-going to chance it; I’ll up  tell 
truth this time, though it does seem most like setting down on a kag of
powder  touching it off just to see where you’ll go to. n I says:

“Miss Mary Jane, is re any place out of town a little ways where you
could go  stay three or four days?”

“Yes; Mr. Lothrop’s.  Why?”

“Never mind why yet.  If I’ll tell you how I know  niggers will see
each or again inside of two weeks--here in this house-- _prove_ how
I know it--will you go to Mr. Lothrop’s  stay four days?”

“Four days!” she says; “I’ll stay a year!”

“All right,” I says, “I don’t want nothing more out of _you_ than just
your word--I drur have it than anor man’s kiss--Bible.”  She
smiled  reddened up very sweet,  I says, “If you don’t mind it,
I’ll shut  door-- bolt it.”

n I come back  set down again,  says:

“Don’t you holler.  Just set still  take it like a man.  I got to
tell  truth,  you want to brace up, Miss Mary, because it’s a
bad kind,  going to be hard to take, but re ain’t no help for
it.  se uncles of yourn ain’t no uncles at all; y’re a couple of
frauds--regular dead-beats.  re, now we’re over  worst of it, you
can st  rest middling easy.”

It jolted her up like everything, of course; but I was over  shoal
water now, so I went right along, her eyes a-blazing higher  higher
all  time,  told her every blame thing, from where we first struck
that young fool going up to  steamboat, clear through to where she
flung herself on to  king’s breast at  front door  he kissed
her sixteen or seventeen times-- n up she jumps, with her face
afire like sunset,  says:

“ brute!  Come, don’t waste a minute--not a _second_--we’ll have m
tarred  feared,  flung in  river!”

Says I:

“Cert’nly.  But do you mean _before_ you go to Mr. Lothrop’s, or--”

“Oh,” she says, “what am I _thinking_ about!” she says,  set right
down again.  “Don’t mind what I said--please don’t--you _won’t,_ now,
_will_ you?” Laying her silky h on mine in that kind of a way that
I said I would die first.  “I never thought, I was so stirred up,” she
says; “now go on,  I won’t do so any more.  You tell me what to do,
 whatever you say I’ll do it.”

“Well,” I says, “it’s a rough gang, m two frauds,  I’m fixed so
I got to travel with m a while longer, wher I want to or not--I
drur not tell you why;  if you was to blow on m this town would
get me out of ir claws,  I’d be all right; but re’d be anor
person that you don’t know about who’d be in big trouble.  Well, we
got to save _him_, hain’t we?  Of course.  Well, n, we won’t blow on
m.”

Saying m words put a good idea in my head.  I see how maybe I could
get me  Jim rid of  frauds; get m jailed here,  n leave.
But I didn’t want to run  raft in  daytime without anybody aboard
to answer questions but me; so I didn’t want  plan to begin working
till pretty late to-night.  I says:

“Miss Mary Jane, I’ll tell you what we’ll do,  you won’t have to stay
at Mr. Lothrop’s so long, nur.  How fur is it?”

“A little short of four miles--right out in  country, back here.”

“Well, that ‘ll answer.  Now you go along out re,  lay low
till nine or half-past to-night,  n get m to fetch you home
again--tell m you’ve thought of something.  If you get here before
eleven put a cle in this window,  if I don’t turn up wait _till_
eleven,  _n_ if I don’t turn up it means I’m gone,  out of 
way,  safe. n you come out  spread  news around,  get
se beats jailed.”

“Good,” she says, “I’ll do it.”

“ if it just happens so that I don’t get away, but get took up along
with m, you must up  say I told you  whole thing beforeh,
 you must st by me all you can.”

“St by you! indeed I will.  y sha’n’t touch a hair of your head!”
 she says,  I see her nostrils spread  her eyes snap when she said
it, too.

“If I get away I sha’n’t be here,” I says, “to prove se rapscallions
ain’t your uncles,  I couldn’t do it if I _was_ here.  I could swear
y was beats  bummers, that’s all, though that’s worth something.
Well, re’s ors can do that better than what I can,  y’re
people that ain’t going to be doubted as quick as I’d be.  I’ll tell you
how to find m.  Gimme a pencil  a piece of paper.  re--‘Royal
Nonesuch, Bricksville.’  Put it away,  don’t lose it.  When 
court wants to find out something about se two, let m send up to
Bricksville  say y’ve got  men that played  Royal Nonesuch,
 ask for some witnesses--why, you’ll have that entire town down here
before you can hardly wink, Miss Mary.   y’ll come a-biling, too.”

I judged we had got everything fixed about right now.  So I says:

“Just let  auction go right along,  don’t worry.  Nobody don’t
have to pay for  things y buy till a whole day after  auction
on accounts of  short notice,  y ain’t going out of this till
y get that money;   way we’ve fixed it  sale ain’t going to
count,  y ain’t going to get no money.  It’s just like  way
it was with  niggers--it warn’t no sale,   niggers will be
back before long.  Why, y can’t collect  money for  _niggers_
yet--y’re in  worst kind of a fix, Miss Mary.”

“Well,” she says, “I’ll run down to breakfast now,  n I’ll start
straight for Mr. Lothrop’s.”

“‘Deed, _that_ ain’t  ticket, Miss Mary Jane,” I says, “by no manner
of means; go _before_ breakfast.”

“Why?”

“What did you reckon I wanted you to go at all for, Miss Mary?”

“Well, I never thought-- come to think, I don’t know.  What was it?”

“Why, it’s because you ain’t one of se lear-face people.  I don’t
want no better book than what your face is.  A body can set down 
read it off like coarse print.  Do you reckon you can go  face your
uncles when y come to kiss you good-morning,  never--”

“re, re, don’t!  Yes, I’ll go before breakfast--I’ll be glad to.
 leave my sisters with m?”

“Yes; never mind about m.  y’ve got to st it yet a while.  y
might suspicion something if all of you was to go.  I don’t want you to
see m, nor your sisters, nor nobody in this town; if a neighbor was
to ask how is your uncles this morning your face would tell something.
 No, you go right along, Miss Mary Jane,  I’ll fix it with all of
m. I’ll tell Miss Susan to give your love to your uncles  say
you’ve went away for a few hours for to get a little rest  change, or
to see a friend,  you’ll be back to-night or early in  morning.”

“Gone to see a friend is all right, but I won’t have my love given to
m.”

“Well, n, it sha’n’t be.”  It was well enough to tell _her_ so--no
harm in it.  It was only a little thing to do,  no trouble;  it’s
 little things that smooths people’s roads  most, down here below;
it would make Mary Jane comfortable,  it wouldn’t cost nothing.  n
I says:  “re’s one more thing--that bag of money.”

“Well, y’ve got that;  it makes me feel pretty silly to think
_how_ y got it.”

“No, you’re out, re.  y hain’t got it.”

“Why, who’s got it?”

“I wish I knowed, but I don’t.  I _had_ it, because I stole it from
m;  I stole it to give to you;  I know where I hid it, but I’m
afraid it ain’t re no more.  I’m awful sorry, Miss Mary Jane, I’m
just as sorry as I can be; but I done  best I could; I did honest.  I
come nigh getting caught,  I had to shove it into  first place I
come to,  run-- it warn’t a good place.”

“Oh, stop blaming yourself--it’s too bad to do it,  I won’t allow
it--you couldn’t help it; it wasn’t your fault.  Where did you hide it?”

I didn’t want to set her to thinking about her troubles again;  I
couldn’t seem to get my mouth to tell her what would make her see that
corpse laying in  coffin with that bag of money on his stomach.  So
for a minute I didn’t say nothing; n I says:

“I’d rur not _tell_ you where I put it, Miss Mary Jane, if you don’t
mind letting me off; but I’ll write it for you on a piece of paper, 
you can read it along  road to Mr. Lothrop’s, if you want to.  Do you
reckon that ‘ll do?”

“Oh, yes.”

So I wrote:  “I put it in  coffin.  It was in re when you was
crying re, away in  night.  I was behind  door,  I was
mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane.”

It made my eyes water a little to remember her crying re all by
herself in  night,  m devils laying re right under her own
roof, shaming her  robbing her;  when I folded it up  give it
to her I see  water come into her eyes, too;  she shook me by 
h, hard,  says:

“_Good_-bye.  I’m going to do everything just as you’ve told me;  if
I don’t ever see you again, I sha’n’t ever forget you  I’ll think of
you a many  a many a time,  I’ll _pray_ for you, too!”-- she was
gone.

Pray for me!  I reckoned if she knowed me she’d take a job that was more
nearer her size.  But I bet she done it, just  same--she was just that
kind.  She had  grit to pray for Judus if she took  notion--re
warn’t no back-down to her, I judge.  You may say what you want to, but
in my opinion she had more s in her than any girl I ever see; in
my opinion she was just full of s.  It sounds like flattery, but it
ain’t no flattery.   when it comes to beauty-- goodness, too--she
lays over m all.  I hain’t ever seen her since that time that I see
her go out of that door; no, I hain’t ever seen her since, but I reckon
I’ve thought of her a many  a many a million times,  of her saying
she would pray for me;  if ever I’d a thought it would do any good
for me to pray for _her_, blamed if I wouldn’t a done it or bust.

Well, Mary Jane she lit out  back way, I reckon; because nobody see
her go.  When I struck Susan   hare-lip, I says:

“What’s  name of m people over on t’or side of  river that
you all goes to see sometimes?”

y says:

“re’s several; but it’s  Proctors, mainly.”

“That’s  name,” I says; “I most forgot it.  Well, Miss Mary Jane she
told me to tell you she’s gone over re in a dreadful hurry--one of
m’s sick.”

“Which one?”

“I don’t know; leastways, I kinder forget; but I thinks it’s--”

“Sakes alive, I hope it ain’t _Hanner_?”

“I’m sorry to say it,” I says, “but Hanner’s  very one.”

“My goodness,  she so well only last week!  Is she took bad?”

“It ain’t no name for it.  y set up with her all night, Miss Mary
Jane said,  y don’t think she’ll last many hours.”

“Only think of that, now!  What’s  matter with her?”

I couldn’t think of anything reasonable, right off that way, so I says:

“Mumps.”

“Mumps your granny!  y don’t set up with people that’s got 
mumps.”

“y don’t, don’t y?  You better bet y do with _se_ mumps.
 se mumps is different.  It’s a new kind, Miss Mary Jane said.”

“How’s it a new kind?”

“Because it’s mixed up with or things.”

“What or things?”

“Well, measles,  whooping-cough,  erysiplas,  consumption, 
yaller jers,  brain-fever,  I don’t know what all.”

“My l!   y call it  _mumps_?”

“That’s what Miss Mary Jane said.”

“Well, what in  nation do y call it  _mumps_ for?”

“Why, because it _is_  mumps.  That’s what it starts with.”

“Well, r’ ain’t no sense in it.  A body might stump his toe,  take
pison,  fall down  well,  break his neck,  bust his brains
out,  somebody come along  ask what killed him,  some numskull
up  say, ‘Why, he stumped his _toe_.’  Would r’ be any sense
in that? _No_.   r’ ain’t no sense in _this_, nur.  Is it
ketching?”

“Is it _ketching_?  Why, how you talk.  Is a _harrow_ catching--in 
dark? If you don’t hitch on to one tooth, you’re bound to on anor,
ain’t you?  you can’t get away with that tooth without fetching 
whole harrow along, can you?  Well, se kind of mumps is a kind of a
harrow, as you may say-- it ain’t no slouch of a harrow, nur, you
come to get it hitched on good.”

“Well, it’s awful, I think,” says  hare-lip.  “I’ll go to Uncle
Harvey --”

“Oh, yes,” I says, “I _would_.  Of _course_ I would.  I wouldn’t lose no
time.”

“Well, why wouldn’t you?”

“Just look at it a minute,  maybe you can see.  Hain’t your uncles
obleegd to get along home to Engl as fast as y can?   do you
reckon y’d be mean enough to go off  leave you to go all that
journey by yourselves?  _you_ know y’ll wait for you.  So fur, so
good. Your uncle Harvey’s a preacher, ain’t he?  Very well, n; is a
_preacher_ going to deceive a steamboat clerk? is he going to deceive
a _ship clerk?_--so as to get m to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard?  Now
_you_ know he ain’t.  What _will_ he do, n?  Why, he’ll say, ‘It’s a
great pity, but my church matters has got to get along  best way y
can; for my niece has been exposed to  dreadful pluribus-unum mumps,
 so it’s my bounden duty to set down here  wait  three months
it takes to show on her if she’s got it.’  But never mind, if you think
it’s best to tell your uncle Harvey--”

“Shucks,  stay fooling around here when we could all be having good
times in Engl whilst we was waiting to find out wher Mary Jane’s
got it or not?  Why, you talk like a muggins.”

“Well, anyway, maybe you’d better tell some of  neighbors.”

“Listen at that, now.  You do beat all for natural stupidness.  Can’t
you _see_ that _y’d_ go  tell?  r’ ain’t no way but just to not
tell anybody at _all_.”

“Well, maybe you’re right--yes, I judge you _are_ right.”

“But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Harvey she’s gone out a while,
anyway, so he won’t be uneasy about her?”

“Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that.  She says, ‘Tell m to
give Uncle Harvey  William my love  a kiss,  say I’ve run over
 river to see Mr.’--Mr.--what _is_  name of that rich family your
uncle Peter used to think so much of?--I mean  one that--”

“Why, you must mean  Apthorps, ain’t it?”

“Of course; bor m kind of names, a body can’t ever seem to
remember m, half  time, somehow.  Yes, she said, say she has run
over for to ask  Apthorps to be sure  come to  auction  buy
this house, because she allowed her uncle Peter would rur y had
it than anybody else;  she’s going to stick to m till y say
y’ll come,  n, if she ain’t too tired, she’s coming home; 
if she is, she’ll be home in  morning anyway.  She said, don’t say
nothing about  Proctors, but only about  Apthorps--which ‘ll be
perfectly true, because she is going re to speak about ir buying
 house; I know it, because she told me so herself.”

“All right,” y said,  cleared out to lay for ir uncles, 
give m  love   kisses,  tell m  message.

Everything was all right now.   girls wouldn’t say nothing because
y wanted to go to Engl;   king   duke would rur
Mary Jane was off working for  auction than around in reach of
Doctor Robinson.  I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neat--I
reckoned Tom Sawyer couldn’t a done it no neater himself.  Of course he
would a throwed more style into it, but I can’t do that very hy, not
being brung up to it.

Well, y held  auction in  public square, along towards  end
of  afternoon,  it strung along,  strung along,   old man
he was on h  looking his level pisonest, up re longside of 
auctioneer,  chipping in a little Scripture now  n, or a little
goody-goody saying of some kind,   duke he was around goo-gooing
for sympathy all he knowed how,  just spreading himself generly.

But by  by  thing dragged through,  everything was
sold--everything but a little old trifling lot in  graveyard.  So
y’d got to work that off--I never see such a girafft as  king was
for wanting to swallow _everything_.  Well, whilst y was at it a
steamboat led,  in about two minutes up comes a crowd a-whooping
 yelling  laughing  carrying on,  singing out:

“_Here’s_ your opposition line! here’s your two sets o’ heirs to old
Peter Wilks-- you pays your money  you takes your choice!”




CHAPTER XXIX.

Y was fetching a very nice-looking old gentleman along,  a
nice-looking younger one, with his right arm in a sling.  , my souls,
how  people yelled  laughed,  kept it up.  But I didn’t see no
joke about it,  I judged it would strain  duke   king some
to see any.  I reckoned y’d turn pale.  But no, nary a pale did
_y_ turn.  duke he never let on he suspicioned what was up, but
just went a goo-gooing around, happy  satisfied, like a jug that’s
googling out buttermilk;  as for  king, he just gazed  gazed
down sorrowful on m new-comers like it give him  stomach-ache in
his very heart to think re could be such frauds  rascals in 
world.  Oh, he done it admirable.  Lots of  principal people
gered around  king, to let him see y was on his side.  That old
gentleman that had just come looked all puzzled to death.  Pretty
soon he begun to speak,  I see straight off he pronounced _like_ an
Englishman--not  king’s way, though  king’s _was_ pretty good for
an imitation.  I can’t give  old gent’s words, nor I can’t imitate
him; but he turned around to  crowd,  says, about like this:

“This is a surprise to me which I wasn’t looking for;  I’ll
acknowledge, cid  frank, I ain’t very well fixed to meet it 
answer it; for my bror  me has had misfortunes; he’s broke his
arm,  our baggage got put off at a town above here last night in 
night by a mistake.  I am Peter Wilks’ bror Harvey,  this is his
bror William, which can’t hear nor speak-- can’t even make signs to
amount to much, now’t he’s only got one h to work m with.  We are
who we say we are;  in a day or two, when I get  baggage, I can
prove it. But up till n I won’t say nothing more, but go to  hotel
 wait.”

So him   new dummy started off;   king he laughs, 
blers out:

“Broke his arm--_very_ likely, _ain’t_ it?-- very convenient, too,
for a fraud that’s got to make signs,  ain’t learnt how.  Lost
ir baggage! That’s _mighty_ good!-- mighty ingenious--under 
_circumstances_!”

So he laughed again;  so did everybody else, except three or four,
or maybe half a dozen.  One of se was that doctor; anor one was
a sharp-looking gentleman, with a carpet-bag of  old-fashioned kind
made out of carpet-stuff, that had just come off of  steamboat 
was talking to him in a low voice,  glancing towards  king now 
n  nodding ir heads--it was Levi Bell,  lawyer that was gone
up to Louisville;  anor one was a big rough husky that come along
 listened to all  old gentleman said,  was listening to 
king now.  when  king got done this husky up  says:

“Say, looky here; if you are Harvey Wilks, when’d you come to this
town?”

“ day before  funeral, friend,” says  king.

“But what time o’ day?”

“In  evenin’--‘bout an hour er two before sundown.”

“_How’d_ you come?”

“I come down on  Susan Powell from Cincinnati.”

“Well, n, how’d you come to be up at  Pint in  _mornin_’--in a
canoe?”

“I warn’t up at  Pint in  mornin’.”

“It’s a lie.”

Several of m jumped for him  begged him not to talk that way to an
old man  a preacher.

“Preacher be hanged, he’s a fraud  a liar.  He was up at  Pint
that mornin’.  I live up re, don’t I?  Well, I was up re, 
he was up re.  I see him re.  He come in a canoe, along with Tim
Collins  a boy.”

 doctor he up  says:

“Would you know  boy again if you was to see him, Hines?”

“I reckon I would, but I don’t know.  Why, yonder he is, now.  I know
him perfectly easy.”

It was me he pointed at.   doctor says:

“Neighbors, I don’t know wher  new couple is frauds or not; but if
_se_ two ain’t frauds, I am an idiot, that’s all.  I think it’s our
duty to see that y don’t get away from here till we’ve looked into
this thing. Come along, Hines; come along,  rest of you.  We’ll take
se fellows to  tavern  affront m with t’or couple,  I
reckon we’ll find out _something_ before we get through.”

It was nuts for  crowd, though maybe not for  king’s friends; so
we all started.  It was about sundown.   doctor he led me along by
 h,  was plenty kind enough, but he never let go my h.

We all got in a big room in  hotel,  lit up some cles, 
fetched in  new couple.  First,  doctor says:

“I don’t wish to be too hard on se two men, but I think y’re
frauds,  y may have complices that we don’t know nothing about.
 If y have, won’t  complices get away with that bag of gold Peter
Wilks left?  It ain’t unlikely.  If se men ain’t frauds, y won’t
object to sending for that money  letting us keep it till y prove
y’re all right--ain’t that so?”

Everybody agreed to that.  So I judged y had our gang in a pretty
tight place right at  outstart.  But  king he only looked
sorrowful,  says:

“Gentlemen, I wish  money was re, for I ain’t got no disposition
to throw anything in  way of a fair, open, out--out investigation
o’ this misable business; but, alas,  money ain’t re; you k’n send
 see, if you want to.”

“Where is it, n?”

“Well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her I took  hid it
inside o’  straw tick o’ my bed, not wishin’ to bank it for  few
days we’d be here,  considerin’  bed a safe place, we not bein’
used to niggers,  suppos’n’ ‘em honest, like servants in Engl.
  niggers stole it  very next mornin’ after I had went down
stairs;  when I sold ‘em I hadn’t missed  money yit, so y got
clean away with it.  My servant here k’n tell you ‘bout it, gentlemen.”

 doctor  several said “Shucks!”  I see nobody didn’t altoger
believe him.  One man asked me if I see  niggers steal it.  I said
no, but I see m sneaking out of  room  hustling away,  I
never thought nothing, only I reckoned y was afraid y had waked up
my master  was trying to get away before he made trouble with m.
 That was all y asked me.  n  doctor whirls on me  says:

“Are _you_ English, too?”

I says yes;  him  some ors laughed,  said, “Stuff!”

Well, n y sailed in on  general investigation,  re we had
it, up  down, hour in, hour out,  nobody never said a word about
supper, nor ever seemed to think about it-- so y kept it up, 
kept it up;  it _was_  worst mixed-up thing you ever see.  y
made  king tell his yarn,  y made  old gentleman tell his’n;
 anybody but a lot of prejudiced chuckleheads would a _seen_ that 
old gentleman was spinning truth  t’or one lies.   by  by
y had me up to tell what I knowed.   king he give me a left-hed
look out of  corner of his eye,  so I knowed enough to talk on 
right side.  I begun to tell about Sheffield,  how we lived re,
 all about  English Wilkses,  so on; but I didn’t get pretty
fur till  doctor begun to laugh;  Levi Bell,  lawyer, says:

“Set down, my boy; I wouldn’t strain myself if I was you.  I reckon
you ain’t used to lying, it don’t seem to come hy; what you want is
practice.  You do it pretty awkward.”

I didn’t care nothing for  compliment, but I was glad to be let off,
anyway.

 doctor he started to say something,  turns  says:

“If you’d been in town at first, Levi Bell--”  king broke in 
reached out his h,  says:

“Why, is this my poor dead bror’s old friend that he’s wrote so often
about?”

 lawyer  him shook hs,   lawyer smiled  looked
pleased,  y talked right along awhile,  n got to one side
 talked low;  at last  lawyer speaks up  says:

“That ‘ll fix it.  I’ll take  order  send it, along with your
bror’s,  n y’ll know it’s all right.”

So y got some paper  a pen,   king he set down  twisted
his head to one side,  chawed his tongue,  scrawled off something;
 n y give  pen to  duke-- n for  first time 
duke looked sick.  But he took  pen  wrote.  So n  lawyer
turns to  new old gentleman  says:

“You  your bror please write a line or two  sign your names.”

 old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn’t read it.   lawyer looked
powerful astonished,  says:

“Well, it beats _me_”-- snaked a lot of old letters out of his pocket,
 examined m,  n examined  old man’s writing,  n
_m_ again;  n says:  “se old letters is from Harvey Wilks;
 here’s _se_ two hwritings,  anybody can see y didn’t
write m” ( king   duke looked sold  foolish, I tell
you, to see how  lawyer had took m in), “ here’s _this_ old
gentleman’s h writing,  anybody can tell, easy enough, _he_ didn’t
write m--fact is,  scratches he makes ain’t properly _writing_ at
all.  Now, here’s some letters from--”

 new old gentleman says:

“If you please, let me explain.  Nobody can read my h but my bror
re--so he copies for me.  It’s _his_ h you’ve got re, not mine.”

“_Well_!” says  lawyer, “this _is_ a state of things.  I’ve got some
of William’s letters, too; so if you’ll get him to write a line or so we
can com--”

“He _can’t_ write with his left h,” says  old gentleman.  “If he
could use his right h, you would see that he wrote his own letters
 mine too.  Look at both, please--y’re by  same h.”

 lawyer done it,  says:

“I believe it’s so-- if it ain’t so, re’s a heap stronger
resemblance than I’d noticed before, anyway.  Well, well, well!  I
thought we was right on  track of a solution, but it’s gone to grass,
partly.  But anyway, one thing is proved--_se_ two ain’t eir of ‘em
Wilkses”-- he wagged his head towards  king   duke.

Well, what do you think?  That muleheaded old fool wouldn’t give in
_n_! Indeed he wouldn’t.  Said it warn’t no fair test.  Said his
bror William was  cussedest joker in  world,  hadn’t tried
to write--_he_ see William was going to play one of his jokes  minute
he put  pen to paper.   so he warmed up  went warbling 
warbling right along till he was actuly beginning to believe what he was
saying _himself_; but pretty soon  new gentleman broke in,  says:

“I’ve thought of something.  Is re anybody here that helped to lay
out my br--helped to lay out  late Peter Wilks for burying?”

“Yes,” says somebody, “me  Ab Turner done it.  We’re both here.”

n  old man turns towards  king,  says:

“Perhaps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on his breast?”

Blamed if  king didn’t have to brace up mighty quick, or he’d a
squshed down like a bluff bank that  river has cut under, it took
him so sudden; , mind you, it was a thing that was calculated to make
most _anybody_ sqush to get fetched such a solid one as that without any
notice, because how was _he_ going to know what was tattooed on  man?
 He whitened a little; he couldn’t help it;  it was mighty still in
re,  everybody bending a little forwards  gazing at him.  Says
I to myself, _now_ he’ll throw up  sponge--re ain’t no more use.
 Well, did he?  A body can’t hardly believe it, but he didn’t.  I reckon
he thought he’d keep  thing up till he tired m people out, so
y’d thin out,  him   duke could break loose  get away.
 Anyway, he set re,  pretty soon he begun to smile,  says:

“Mf!  It’s a _very_ tough question, _ain’t_ it!  _yes_, sir, I k’n
tell you what’s tattooed on his breast.  It’s jest a small, thin, blue
arrow--that’s what it is;  if you don’t look clost, you can’t see it.
 _now_ what do you say--hey?”

Well, I never see anything like that old blister for clean out--out
cheek.

 new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner  his pard, 
his eye lights up like he judged he’d got  king _this_ time, 
says:

“re--you’ve heard what he said!  Was re any such mark on Peter
Wilks’ breast?”

Both of m spoke up  says:

“We didn’t see no such mark.”

“Good!” says  old gentleman.  “Now, what you _did_ see on his breast
was a small dim P,  a B (which is an initial he dropped when he was
young),  a W, with dashes between m, so:  P--B--W”-- he marked
m that way on a piece of paper.  “Come, ain’t that what you saw?”

Both of m spoke up again,  says:

“No, we _didn’t_.  We never seen any marks at all.”

Well, everybody _was_ in a state of mind now,  y sings out:

“ whole _bilin_’ of ‘m ‘s frauds!  Le’s duck ‘em! le’s drown ‘em!
le’s ride ‘em on a rail!”  everybody was whooping at once,  re
was a rattling powwow.  But  lawyer he jumps on  table  yells,
 says:

“Gentlemen--gentle_men!_  Hear me just a word--just a _single_ word--if you
_please_!  re’s one way yet--let’s go  dig up  corpse  look.”

That took m.

“Hooray!” y all shouted,  was starting right off; but  lawyer
  doctor sung out:

“Hold on, hold on!  Collar all se four men   boy,  fetch
_m_ along, too!”

“We’ll do it!” y all shouted; “ if we don’t find m marks we’ll
lynch  whole gang!”

I _was_ scared, now, I tell you.  But re warn’t no getting away, you
know. y gripped us all,  marched us right along, straight for 
graveyard, which was a mile  a half down  river,   whole
town at our heels, for we made noise enough,  it was only nine in 
evening.

As we went by our house I wished I hadn’t sent Mary Jane out of town;
because now if I could tip her  wink she’d light out  save me, 
blow on our dead-beats.

Well, we swarmed along down  river road, just carrying on like
wildcats;  to make it more scary  sky was darking up,  
lightning beginning to wink  flitter,   wind to shiver amongst
 leaves. This was  most awful trouble  most dangersome I ever
was in;  I was kinder stunned; everything was going so different from
what I had allowed for; stead of being fixed so I could take my own time
if I wanted to,  see all  fun,  have Mary Jane at my back to
save me  set me free when  close-fit come, here was nothing in 
world betwixt me  sudden death but just m tattoo-marks.  If y
didn’t find m--

I couldn’t bear to think about it;  yet, somehow, I couldn’t think
about nothing else.  It got darker  darker,  it was a beautiful
time to give  crowd  slip; but that big husky had me by 
wrist--Hines-- a body might as well try to give Goliar  slip.  He
dragged me right along, he was so excited,  I had to run to keep up.

When y got re y swarmed into  graveyard  washed over it
like an overflow.   when y got to  grave y found y had
about a hundred times as many shovels as y wanted, but nobody hadn’t
thought to fetch a lantern.  But y sailed into digging anyway by 
flicker of  lightning,  sent a man to  nearest house, a half a
mile off, to borrow one.

So y dug  dug like everything;  it got awful dark,   rain
started,   wind swished  swushed along,   lightning come
brisker  brisker,   thunder boomed; but m people never took
no notice of it, y was so full of this business;  one minute
you could see everything  every face in that big crowd,  
shovelfuls of dirt sailing up out of  grave,   next second 
dark wiped it all out,  you couldn’t see nothing at all.

At last y got out  coffin  begun to unscrew  lid,  n
such anor crowding  shouldering  shoving as re was, to
scrouge in  get a sight, you never see;  in  dark, that way, it
was awful.  Hines he hurt my wrist dreadful pulling  tugging so,
 I reckon he clean forgot I was in  world, he was so excited 
panting.

All of a sudden  lightning let go a perfect sluice of white glare,
 somebody sings out:

“By  living jingo, here’s  bag of gold on his breast!”

Hines let out a whoop, like everybody else,  dropped my wrist 
give a big surge to bust his way in  get a look,   way I lit
out  shinned for  road in  dark re ain’t nobody can tell.

I had  road all to myself,  I fairly flew--leastways, I had it all
to myself except  solid dark,   now--n glares,  
buzzing of  rain,   thrashing of  wind,   splitting of
 thunder;  sure as you are born I did clip it along!

When I struck  town I see re warn’t nobody out in  storm, so
I never hunted for no back streets, but humped it straight through 
main one;  when I begun to get towards our house I aimed my eye 
set it. No light re;  house all dark--which made me feel sorry 
disappointed, I didn’t know why.  But at last, just as I was sailing by,
_flash_ comes  light in Mary Jane’s window!  my heart swelled up
sudden, like to bust;   same second  house  all was behind
me in  dark,  wasn’t ever going to be before me no more in this
world. She _was_  best girl I ever see,  had  most s.

 minute I was far enough above  town to see I could make 
towhead, I begun to look sharp for a boat to borrow,   first
time  lightning showed me one that wasn’t chained I snatched it 
shoved. It was a canoe,  warn’t fastened with nothing but a rope.
  towhead was a rattling big distance off, away out re in 
middle of  river, but I didn’t lose no time;  when I struck 
raft at last I was so fagged I would a just laid down to blow  gasp
if I could afforded it.  But I didn’t.  As I sprung aboard I sung out:

“Out with you, Jim,  set her loose!  Glory be to goodness, we’re shut
of m!”

Jim lit out,  was a-coming for me with both arms spread, he was so
full of joy; but when I glimpsed him in  lightning my heart shot up
in my mouth  I went overboard backwards; for I forgot he was old King
Lear  a drownded A-rab all in one,  it most scared  livers 
lights out of me.  But Jim fished me out,  was going to hug me 
bless me,  so on, he was so glad I was back  we was shut of 
king   duke, but I says:

“Not now; have it for breakfast, have it for breakfast!  Cut loose 
let her slide!”

So in two seconds away we went a-sliding down  river,  it _did_
seem so good to be free again  all by ourselves on  big river, 
nobody to bor us.  I had to skip around a bit,  jump up  crack
my heels a few times--I couldn’t help it; but about  third crack
I noticed a sound that I knowed mighty well,  held my breath 
listened  waited;  sure enough, when  next flash busted out
over  water, here y come!-- just a-laying to ir oars 
making ir skiff hum!  It was  king   duke.

So I wilted right down on to  planks n,  give up;  it was
all I could do to keep from crying.




CHAPTER XXX.

WHEN y got aboard  king went for me,  shook me by  collar,
 says:

“Tryin’ to give us  slip, was ye, you pup!  Tired of our company,
hey?”

I says:

“No, your majesty, we warn’t--_please_ don’t, your majesty!”

“Quick, n,  tell us what _was_ your idea, or I’ll shake 
insides out o’ you!”

“Honest, I’ll tell you everything just as it happened, your majesty.
  man that had a-holt of me was very good to me,  kept saying he
had a boy about as big as me that died last year,  he was sorry
to see a boy in such a dangerous fix;  when y was all took by
surprise by finding  gold,  made a rush for  coffin, he lets go
of me  whispers, ‘Heel it now, or y’ll hang ye, sure!’  I lit
out.  It didn’t seem no good for _me_ to stay--I couldn’t do nothing,
 I didn’t want to be hung if I could get away.  So I never stopped
running till I found  canoe;  when I got here I told Jim to hurry,
or y’d catch me  hang me yet,  said I was afeard you  
duke wasn’t alive now,  I was awful sorry,  so was Jim,  was
awful glad when we see you coming; you may ask Jim if I didn’t.”

Jim said it was so;   king told him to shut up,  said, “Oh,
yes, it’s _mighty_ likely!”  shook me up again,  said he reckoned
he’d drownd me.  But  duke says:

“Leggo  boy, you old idiot!  Would _you_ a done any different?  Did
you inquire around for _him_ when you got loose?  I don’t remember it.”

So  king let go of me,  begun to cuss that town  everybody in
it. But  duke says:

“You better a blame’ sight give _yourself_ a good cussing, for you’re
 one that’s entitled to it most.  You hain’t done a thing from 
start that had any sense in it, except coming out so cool  cheeky
with that imaginary blue-arrow mark.  That _was_ bright--it was right
down bully;  it was  thing that saved us.  For if it hadn’t been
for that y’d a jailed us till m Englishmen’s baggage come--
n-- penitentiary, you bet! But that trick took ‘em to 
graveyard,   gold done us a still bigger kindness; for if 
excited fools hadn’t let go all holts  made that rush to get a
look we’d a slept in our cravats to-night--cravats warranted to _wear_,
too--longer than _we’d_ need ‘em.”

y was still a minute--thinking; n  king says, kind of
absent-minded like:

“Mf!   we reckoned  _niggers_ stole it!”

That made me squirm!

“Yes,” says  duke, kinder slow  deliberate  sarcastic, “_we_
did.”

After about a half a minute  king drawls out:

“Leastways, I did.”

 duke says,  same way:

“On  contrary, I did.”

 king kind of ruffles up,  says:

“Looky here, Bilgewater, what’r you referrin’ to?”

 duke says, pretty brisk:

“When it comes to that, maybe you’ll let me ask, what was _you_
referring to?”

“Shucks!” says  king, very sarcastic; “but I don’t know--maybe you was
asleep,  didn’t know what you was about.”

 duke bristles up now,  says:

“Oh, let _up_ on this cussed nonsense; do you take me for a blame’ fool?
Don’t you reckon I know who hid that money in that coffin?”

“_Yes_, sir!  I know you _do_ know, because you done it yourself!”

“It’s a lie!”--  duke went for him.   king sings out:

“Take y’r hs off!--leggo my throat!--I take it all back!”

 duke says:

“Well, you just own up, first, that you _did_ hide that money re,
intending to give me  slip one of se days,  come back  dig
it up,  have it all to yourself.”

“Wait jest a minute, duke--answer me this one question, honest  fair;
if you didn’t put  money re, say it,  I’ll b’lieve you, 
take back everything I said.”

“You old scoundrel, I didn’t,  you know I didn’t.  re, now!”

“Well, n, I b’lieve you.  But answer me only jest this one more--now
_don’t_ git mad; didn’t you have it in your mind to hook  money 
hide it?”

 duke never said nothing for a little bit; n he says:

“Well, I don’t care if I _did_, I didn’t _do_ it, anyway.  But you not
only had it in mind to do it, but you _done_ it.”

“I wisht I never die if I done it, duke,  that’s honest.  I won’t say
I warn’t goin’ to do it, because I _was_; but you--I mean somebody--got in
ahead o’ me.”

“It’s a lie!  You done it,  you got to _say_ you done it, or--”

 king began to gurgle,  n he gasps out:

“‘Nough!--I _own up!_”

I was very glad to hear him say that; it made me feel much more easier
than what I was feeling before.  So  duke took his hs off 
says:

“If you ever deny it again I’ll drown you.  It’s _well_ for you to set
re  blubber like a baby--it’s fitten for you, after  way
you’ve acted. I never see such an old ostrich for wanting to gobble
everything-- I a-trusting you all  time, like you was my own
far.  You ought to been ashamed of yourself to st by  hear it
saddled on to a lot of poor niggers,  you never say a word for ‘em.
 It makes me feel ridiculous to think I was soft enough to _believe_
that rubbage.  Cuss you, I can see now why you was so anxious to make
up  deffisit--you wanted to get what money I’d got out of  Nonesuch
 one thing or anor,  scoop it _all_!”

 king says, timid,  still a-snuffling:

“Why, duke, it was you that said make up  deffisit; it warn’t me.”

“Dry up!  I don’t want to hear no more out of you!” says  duke.  “
_now_ you see what you GOT by it.  y’ve got all ir own money back,
 all of _ourn_ but a shekel or two _besides_.  G’long to bed, 
don’t you deffersit _me_ no more deffersits, long ‘s _you_ live!”

So  king sneaked into  wigwam  took to his bottle for comfort,
 before long  duke tackled HIS bottle;  so in about a half an
hour y was as thick as thieves again,   tighter y got 
lovinger y got,  went off a-snoring in each or’s arms.  y
both got powerful mellow, but I noticed  king didn’t get mellow
enough to forget to remember to not deny about hiding  money-bag
again.  That made me feel easy  satisfied.  Of course when y got
to snoring we had a long gabble,  I told Jim everything.




CHAPTER XXXI.

WE dasn’t stop again at any town for days  days; kept right along
down  river.  We was down south in  warm wear now,  a mighty
long ways from home.  We begun to come to trees with Spanish moss on
m, hanging down from  limbs like long, gray beards.  It was 
first I ever see it growing,  it made  woods look solemn 
dismal.  So now  frauds reckoned y was out of danger,  y
begun to work  villages again.

First y done a lecture on temperance; but y didn’t make enough
for m both to get drunk on.  n in anor village y started
a dancing-school; but y didn’t know no more how to dance than a
kangaroo does; so  first prance y made  general public jumped
in  pranced m out of town.  Anor time y tried to go at
yellocution; but y didn’t yellocute long till  audience got up 
give m a solid good cussing,  made m skip out.  y tackled
missionarying,  mesmerizing,  doctoring,  telling fortunes, 
a little of everything; but y couldn’t seem to have no luck.  So at
last y got just about dead broke,  laid around  raft as she
floated along, thinking  thinking,  never saying nothing, by 
half a day at a time,  dreadful blue  desperate.

 at last y took a change  begun to lay ir heads toger in
 wigwam  talk low  confidential two or three hours at a time.
Jim  me got uneasy.  We didn’t like  look of it.  We judged y
was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever.  We turned it
over  over,  at last we made up our minds y was going to break
into somebody’s house or store, or was going into  counterfeit-money
business, or something. So n we was pretty scared,  made up an
agreement that we wouldn’t have nothing in  world to do with such
actions,  if we ever got  least show we would give m  cold
shake  clear out  leave m behind. Well, early one morning we
hid  raft in a good, safe place about two mile below a little bit of
a shabby village named Pikesville,   king he went ashore  told
us all to stay hid whilst he went up to town  smelt around to see
if anybody had got any wind of  Royal Nonesuch re yet. (“House to
rob, you _mean_,” says I to myself; “ when you get through robbing it
you’ll come back here  wonder what has become of me  Jim  
raft-- you’ll have to take it out in wondering.”)  he said if he
warn’t back by midday  duke  me would know it was all right, 
we was to come along.

So we stayed where we was.   duke he fretted  sweated around, 
was in a mighty sour way.  He scolded us for everything,  we couldn’t
seem to do nothing right; he found fault with every little thing.
Something was a-brewing, sure.  I was good  glad when midday come
 no king; we could have a change, anyway-- maybe a chance for __
change on top of it.  So me   duke went up to  village, 
hunted around re for  king,  by  by we found him in 
back room of a little low doggery, very tight,  a lot of loafers
bullyragging him for sport,  he a-cussing  a-threatening with all
his might,  so tight he couldn’t walk,  couldn’t do nothing to
m.   duke he begun to abuse him for an old fool,   king
begun to sass back,   minute y was fairly at it I lit out 
shook  reefs out of my hind legs,  spun down  river road like
a deer, for I see our chance;  I made up my mind that it would be a
long day before y ever see me  Jim again.  I got down re all
out of breath but loaded up with joy,  sung out:

“Set her loose, Jim! we’re all right now!”

But re warn’t no answer,  nobody come out of  wigwam.  Jim was
gone!  I set up a shout-- n anor-- n anor one;  run
this way  that in  woods, whooping  screeching; but it warn’t
no use--old Jim was gone.  n I set down  cried; I couldn’t help
it. But I couldn’t set still long.  Pretty soon I went out on  road,
trying to think what I better do,  I run across a boy walking, 
asked him if he’d seen a strange nigger dressed so  so,  he says:

“Yes.”

“Whereabouts?” says I.

“Down to Silas Phelps’ place, two mile below here.  He’s a runaway
nigger,  y’ve got him.  Was you looking for him?”

“You bet I ain’t!  I run across him in  woods about an hour or two
ago,  he said if I hollered he’d cut my livers out-- told me to lay
down  stay where I was;  I done it.  Been re ever since; afeard
to come out.”

“Well,” he says, “you needn’t be afeard no more, becuz y’ve got him.
He run off f’m down South, som’ers.”

“It’s a good job y got him.”

“Well, I _reckon_!  re’s two hunderd dollars reward on him.  It’s
like picking up money out’n  road.”

“Yes, it is-- I could a had it if I’d been big enough; I see him
_first_. Who nailed him?”

“It was an old fellow--a stranger-- he sold out his chance in him for
forty dollars, becuz he’s got to go up  river  can’t wait.  Think
o’ that, now!  You bet _I’d_ wait, if it was seven year.”

“That’s me, every time,” says I.  “But maybe his chance ain’t worth
no more than that, if he’ll sell it so cheap.  Maybe re’s something
ain’t straight about it.”

“But it _is_, though--straight as a string.  I see  hbill myself.
 It tells all about him, to a dot--paints him like a picture,  tells
 plantation he’s frum, below Newr_leans_.  No-sirree-_bob_, y
ain’t no trouble ‘bout _that_ speculation, you bet you.  Say, gimme a
chaw tobacker, won’t ye?”

I didn’t have none, so he left.  I went to  raft,  set down in 
wigwam to think.  But I couldn’t come to nothing.  I thought till I wore
my head sore, but I couldn’t see no way out of  trouble.  After all
this long journey,  after all we’d done for m scoundrels, here it
was all come to nothing, everything all busted up  ruined, because
y could have  heart to serve Jim such a trick as that,  make
him a slave again all his life,  amongst strangers, too, for forty
dirty dollars.

Once I said to myself it would be a thous times better for Jim to
be a slave at home where his family was, as long as he’d _got_ to be a
slave,  so I’d better write a letter to Tom Sawyer  tell him to
tell Miss Watson where he was.  But I soon give up that notion for two
things: she’d be mad  disgusted at his rascality  ungratefulness
for leaving her,  so she’d sell him straight down  river again;
 if she didn’t, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger,
 y’d make Jim feel it all  time,  so he’d feel ornery 
disgraced.  n think of _me_!  It would get all around that Huck
Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom;  if I was ever to see
anybody from that town again I’d be ready to get down  lick his boots
for shame.  That’s just  way:  a person does a low-down thing, 
n he don’t want to take no consequences of it. Thinks as long as he
can hide it, it ain’t no disgrace.  That was my fix exactly.  more I
studied about this  more my conscience went to grinding me,  
more wicked  low-down  ornery I got to feeling.  at last, when
it hit me all of a sudden that here was  plain h of Providence
slapping me in  face  letting me know my wickedness was being
watched all  time from up re in heaven, whilst I was stealing a
poor old woman’s nigger that hadn’t ever done me no harm,  now was
showing me re’s One that’s always on  lookout,  ain’t a-going
to allow no such miserable doings to go only just so fur  no furr,
I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared.  Well, I tried  best I
could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung
up wicked,  so I warn’t so much to blame; but something inside of me
kept saying, “re was  Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; 
if you’d a done it y’d a learnt you re that people that acts as
I’d been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire.”

It made me shiver.   I about made up my mind to pray,  see if I
couldn’t try to quit being  kind of a boy I was  be better.  So
I kneeled down.  But  words wouldn’t come.  Why wouldn’t y?  It
warn’t no use to try  hide it from Him.  Nor from _me_, neir.  I
knowed very well why y wouldn’t come.  It was because my heart warn’t
right; it was because I warn’t square; it was because I was playing
double.  I was letting _on_ to give up sin, but away inside of me I was
holding on to  biggest one of all.  I was trying to make my mouth
_say_ I would do  right thing   clean thing,  go  write
to that nigger’s owner  tell where he was; but deep down in me I
knowed it was a lie,  He knowed it.  You can’t pray a lie--I found
that out.

So I was full of trouble, full as I could be;  didn’t know what to
do. At last I had an idea;  I says, I’ll go  write  letter--
n see if I can pray.  Why, it was astonishing,  way I felt as
light as a fear right straight off,  my troubles all gone.  So I
got a piece of paper  a pencil, all glad  excited,  set down
 wrote:

Miss Watson, your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below
Pikesville,  Mr. Phelps has got him  he will give him up for 
reward if you send.

_Huck Finn._

I felt good  all washed clean of sin for  first time I had ever
felt so in my life,  I knowed I could pray now.  But I didn’t do it
straight off, but laid  paper down  set re thinking--thinking
how good it was all this happened so,  how near I come to being lost
 going to hell.   went on thinking.   got to thinking over our
trip down  river;  I see Jim before me all  time:  in  day
 in  night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms,  we
a-floating along, talking  singing  laughing.  But somehow I
couldn’t seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only 
or kind.  I’d see him sting my watch on top of his’n, ‘stead of
calling me, so I could go on sleeping;  see him how glad he was when
I come back out of  fog;  when I come to him again in  swamp,
up re where  feud was;  such-like times;  would always call
me honey,  pet me  do everything he could think of for me,  how
good he always was;  at last I struck  time I saved him by telling
 men we had small-pox aboard,  he was so grateful,  said I was
 best friend old Jim ever had in  world,   _only_ one he’s
got now;  n I happened to look around  see that paper.

It was a close place.  I took it up,  held it in my h.  I was
a-trembling, because I’d got to decide, forever, betwixt two things, 
I knowed it.  I studied a minute, sort of holding my breath,  n
says to myself:

“All right, n, I’ll _go_ to hell”-- tore it up.

It was awful thoughts  awful words, but y was said.   I let
m stay said;  never thought no more about reforming.  I shoved 
whole thing out of my head,  said I would take up wickedness again,
which was in my line, being brung up to it,   or warn’t.  
for a starter I would go to work  steal Jim out of slavery again;
 if I could think up anything worse, I would do that, too; because as
long as I was in,  in for good, I might as well go  whole hog.

n I set to thinking over how to get at it,  turned over some
considerable many ways in my mind;  at last fixed up a plan that
suited me.  So n I took  bearings of a woody isl that was down
 river a piece,  as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with my
raft  went for it,  hid it re,  n turned in.  I slept 
night through,  got up before it was light,  had my breakfast,
 put on my store clos,  tied up some ors  one thing or
anor in a bundle,  took  canoe  cleared for shore.  I led
below where I judged was Phelps’s place,  hid my bundle in  woods,
 n filled up  canoe with water,  loaded rocks into her 
sunk her where I could find her again when I wanted her, about a quarter
of a mile below a little steam sawmill that was on  bank.

n I struck up  road,  when I passed  mill I see a sign on
it, “Phelps’s Sawmill,”  when I come to  farm-houses, two or
three hundred yards furr along, I kept my eyes peeled, but didn’t
see nobody around, though it was good daylight now.  But I didn’t mind,
because I didn’t want to see nobody just yet--I only wanted to get 
lay of  l. According to my plan, I was going to turn up re from
 village, not from below.  So I just took a look,  shoved along,
straight for town. Well,  very first man I see when I got re was
 duke.  He was sticking up a bill for  Royal Nonesuch--three-night
performance--like that or time.  y had  cheek, m frauds!  I
was right on him before I could shirk.  He looked astonished,  says:

“Hel-_lo_!  Where’d _you_ come from?”  n he says, kind of glad 
eager, “Where’s  raft?--got her in a good place?”

I says:

“Why, that’s just what I was going to ask your grace.”

n he didn’t look so joyful,  says:

“What was your idea for asking _me_?” he says.

“Well,” I says, “when I see  king in that doggery yesterday I says
to myself, we can’t get him home for hours, till he’s soberer; so I went
a-loafing around town to put in  time  wait.  A man up  offered
me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over  river  back to fetch
a sheep,  so I went along; but when we was dragging him to  boat,
  man left me a-holt of  rope  went behind him to shove him
along, he was too strong for me  jerked loose  run,  we after
him.  We didn’t have no dog,  so we had to chase him all over 
country till we tired him out.  We never got him till dark; n we
fetched him over,  I started down for  raft.  When I got re 
see it was gone, I says to myself, ‘y’ve got into trouble  had to
leave;  y’ve took my nigger, which is  only nigger I’ve got in
 world,  now I’m in a strange country,  ain’t got no property
no more, nor nothing,  no way to make my living;’ so I set down 
cried.  I slept in  woods all night.  But what _did_ become of 
raft, n?-- Jim--poor Jim!”

“Blamed if I know--that is, what’s become of  raft.  That old fool had
made a trade  got forty dollars,  when we found him in  doggery
 loafers had matched half-dollars with him  got every cent but
what he’d spent for whisky;  when I got him home late last night 
found  raft gone, we said, ‘That little rascal has stole our raft 
shook us,  run off down  river.’”

“I wouldn’t shake my _nigger_, would I?-- only nigger I had in 
world,   only property.”

“We never thought of that.  Fact is, I reckon we’d come to consider him
_our_ nigger; yes, we did consider him so--goodness knows we had trouble
enough for him.  So when we see  raft was gone  we flat broke,
re warn’t anything for it but to try  Royal Nonesuch anor
shake.  I’ve pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn.  Where’s
that ten cents? Give it here.”

I had considerable money, so I give him ten cents, but begged him to
spend it for something to eat,  give me some, because it was all 
money I had,  I hadn’t had nothing to eat since yesterday.  He never
said nothing.   next minute he whirls on me  says:

“Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us?  We’d skin him if he done
that!”

“How can he blow?  Hain’t he run off?”

“No!  That old fool sold him,  never divided with me,   money’s
gone.”

“_Sold_ him?”  I says,  begun to cry; “why, he was _my_ nigger, 
that was my money.  Where is he?--I want my nigger.”

“Well, you can’t _get_ your nigger, that’s all--so dry up your
blubbering. Looky here--do you think _you’d_ venture to blow on us?
 Blamed if I think I’d trust you.  Why, if you _was_ to blow on us--”

He stopped, but I never see  duke look so ugly out of his eyes
before. I went on a-whimpering,  says:

“I don’t want to blow on nobody;  I ain’t got no time to blow, nohow.
I got to turn out  find my nigger.”

He looked kinder bored,  stood re with his bills fluttering on
his arm, thinking,  wrinkling up his forehead.  At last he says:

“I’ll tell you something.  We got to be here three days.  If you’ll
promise you won’t blow,  won’t let  nigger blow, I’ll tell you
where to find him.”

So I promised,  he says:

“A farmer by  name of Silas Ph--”  n he stopped.  You see, he
started to tell me  truth; but when he stopped that way,  begun to
study  think again, I reckoned he was changing his mind.   so he
was. He wouldn’t trust me; he wanted to make sure of having me out of
 way  whole three days.  So pretty soon he says:

“ man that bought him is named Abram Foster--Abram G. Foster-- he
lives forty mile back here in  country, on  road to Lafayette.”

“All right,” I says, “I can walk it in three days.   I’ll start this
very afternoon.”

“No you wont, you’ll start _now_;  don’t you lose any time about it,
neir, nor do any gabbling by  way.  Just keep a tight tongue in
your head  move right along,  n you won’t get into trouble with
_us_, d’ye hear?”

That was  order I wanted,  that was  one I played for.  I
wanted to be left free to work my plans.

“So clear out,” he says; “ you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want
to. Maybe you can get him to believe that Jim _is_ your nigger--some
idiots don’t require documents--leastways I’ve heard re’s such down
South here.   when you tell him  hbill   reward’s bogus,
maybe he’ll believe you when you explain to him what  idea was for
getting ‘em out.  Go ‘long now,  tell him anything you want to; but
mind you don’t work your jaw any _between_ here  re.”

So I left,  struck for  back country.  I didn’t look around, but I
kinder felt like he was watching me.  But I knowed I could tire him out
at that.  I went straight out in  country as much as a mile before
I stopped; n I doubled back through  woods towards Phelps’.  I
reckoned I better start in on my plan straight off without fooling
around, because I wanted to stop Jim’s mouth till se fellows could
get away.  I didn’t want no trouble with ir kind.  I’d seen all I
wanted to of m,  wanted to get entirely shut of m.




CHAPTER XXXII.

WHEN I got re it was all still  Sunday-like,  hot  sunshiny;
 hs was gone to  fields;  re was m kind of faint
dronings of bugs  flies in  air that makes it seem so lonesome 
like everybody’s dead  gone;  if a breeze fans along  quivers
 leaves it makes you feel mournful, because you feel like it’s
spirits whispering--spirits that’s been dead ever so many years-- you
always think y’re talking about _you_.  As a general thing it makes a
body wish _he_ was dead, too,  done with it all.

Phelps’ was one of se little one-horse cotton plantations,  y
all look alike.  A rail fence round a two-acre yard; a stile made out
of logs sawed off  up-ended in steps, like barrels of a different
length, to climb over  fence with,  for  women to st on when
y are going to jump on to a horse; some sickly grass-patches in 
big yard, but mostly it was bare  smooth, like an old hat with 
nap rubbed off; big double log-house for  white folks--hewed logs,
with  chinks stopped up with mud or mortar,  se mud-stripes
been whitewashed some time or anor; round-log kitchen, with a big
broad, open but roofed passage joining it to  house; log smoke-house
back of  kitchen; three little log nigger-cabins in a row t’or
side  smoke-house; one little hut all by itself away down against
 back fence,  some outbuildings down a piece  or side;
ash-hopper  big kettle to bile soap in by  little hut; bench by
 kitchen door, with bucket of water  a gourd; hound asleep re
in  sun; more hounds asleep round about; about three shade trees away
off in a corner; some currant bushes  gooseberry bushes in one place
by  fence; outside of  fence a garden  a watermelon patch; n
 cotton fields begins,  after  fields  woods.

I went around  clumb over  back stile by  ash-hopper, 
started for  kitchen.  When I got a little ways I heard  dim hum
of a spinning-wheel wailing along up  sinking along down again;
 n I knowed for certain I wished I was dead--for that _is_ 
lonesomest sound in  whole world.

I went right along, not fixing up any particular plan, but just trusting
to Providence to put  right words in my mouth when  time come; for
I’d noticed that Providence always did put  right words in my mouth
if I left it alone.

When I got half-way, first one hound  n anor got up  went
for me,  of course I stopped  faced m,  kept still.  
such anor powwow as y made!  In a quarter of a minute I was a kind
of a hub of a wheel, as you may say--spokes made out of dogs--circle of
fifteen of m packed toger around me, with ir necks  noses
stretched up towards me, a-barking  howling;  more a-coming; you
could see m sailing over fences  around corners from everywheres.

A nigger woman come tearing out of  kitchen with a rolling-pin in her
h, singing out, “Begone _you_ Tige! you Spot! begone sah!”  she
fetched first one  n anor of m a clip  sent m howling,
 n  rest followed;   next second half of m come back,
wagging ir tails around me,  making friends with me.  re ain’t
no harm in a hound, nohow.

 behind  woman comes a little nigger girl  two little nigger
boys without anything on but tow-linen shirts,  y hung on to ir
mor’s gown,  peeped out from behind her at me, bashful,  way
y always do.   here comes  white woman running from  house,
about forty-five or fifty year old, bareheaded,  her spinning-stick
in her h;  behind her comes her little white children, acting 
same way  little niggers was doing.  She was smiling all over so she
could hardly st-- says:

“It’s _you_, at last!--_ain’t_ it?”

I out with a “Yes’m” before I thought.

She grabbed me  hugged me tight;  n gripped me by both hs
 shook  shook;   tears come in her eyes,  run down over;
 she couldn’t seem to hug  shake enough,  kept saying, “You
don’t look as much like your mor as I reckoned you would; but law
sakes, I don’t care for that, I’m so glad to see you!  Dear, dear, it
does seem like I could eat you up!  Children, it’s your cousin Tom!--tell
him howdy.”

But y ducked ir heads,  put ir fingers in ir mouths, 
hid behind her.  So she run on:

“Lize, hurry up  get him a hot breakfast right away--or did you get
your breakfast on  boat?”

I said I had got it on  boat.  So n she started for  house,
leading me by  h,   children tagging after.  When we got
re she set me down in a split-bottomed chair,  set herself down on
a little low stool in front of me, holding both of my hs,  says:

“Now I can have a _good_ look at you; , laws-a-me, I’ve been hungry
for it a many  a many a time, all se long years,  it’s come
at last! We been expecting you a couple of days  more.  What kep’
you?--boat get aground?”

“Yes’m--she--”

“Don’t say yes’m--say Aunt Sally.  Where’d she get aground?”

I didn’t rightly know what to say, because I didn’t know wher 
boat would be coming up  river or down.  But I go a good deal on
instinct;  my instinct said she would be coming up--from down towards
Orleans. That didn’t help me much, though; for I didn’t know  names
of bars down that way.  I see I’d got to invent a bar, or forget 
name of  one we got aground on--or--Now I struck an idea,  fetched
it out:

“It warn’t  grounding--that didn’t keep us back but a little.  We
blowed out a cylinder-head.”

“Good gracious! anybody hurt?”

“No’m.  Killed a nigger.”

“Well, it’s lucky; because sometimes people do get hurt.  Two years ago
last Christmas your uncle Silas was coming up from Newrleans on  old
Lally Rook,  she blowed out a cylinder-head  crippled a man.  
I think he died afterwards.  He was a Baptist.  Your uncle Silas knowed
a family in Baton Rouge that knowed his people very well.  Yes, I
remember now, he _did_ die.  Mortification set in,  y had to
amputate him. But it didn’t save him.  Yes, it was mortification--that
was it.  He turned blue all over,  died in  hope of a glorious
resurrection. y say he was a sight to look at.  Your uncle’s been up
to  town every day to fetch you.  he’s gone again, not more’n an
hour ago; he’ll be back any minute now. You must a met him on  road,
didn’t you?--oldish man, with a--”

“No, I didn’t see nobody, Aunt Sally.   boat led just at daylight,
 I left my baggage on  wharf-boat  went looking around  town
 out a piece in  country, to put in  time  not get here too
soon;  so I come down  back way.”

“Who’d you give  baggage to?”

“Nobody.”

“Why, child, it ‘ll be stole!”

“Not where I hid it I reckon it won’t,” I says.

“How’d you get your breakfast so early on  boat?”

It was kinder thin ice, but I says:

“ captain see me sting around,  told me I better have something
to eat before I went ashore; so he took me in  texas to  officers’
lunch,  give me all I wanted.”

I was getting so uneasy I couldn’t listen good.  I had my mind on 
children all  time; I wanted to get m out to one side  pump
m a little,  find out who I was.  But I couldn’t get no show, Mrs.
Phelps kept it up  run on so.  Pretty soon she made  cold chills
streak all down my back, because she says:

“But here we’re a-running on this way,  you hain’t told me a word
about Sis, nor any of m.  Now I’ll rest my works a little,  you
start up yourn; just tell me _everything_--tell me all about ‘m all every
one of ‘m;  how y are,  what y’re doing,  what y told
you to tell me;  every last thing you can think of.”

Well, I see I was up a stump-- up it good.  Providence had stood by
me this fur all right, but I was hard  tight aground now.  I see it
warn’t a bit of use to try to go ahead--I’d got to throw up my h.  So
I says to myself, here’s anor place where I got to resk  truth.
 I opened my mouth to begin; but she grabbed me  hustled me in behind
 bed,  says:

“Here he comes!  Stick your head down lower--re, that’ll do; you can’t
be seen now.  Don’t you let on you’re here.  I’ll play a joke on him.
Children, don’t you say a word.”

I see I was in a fix now.  But it warn’t no use to worry; re warn’t
nothing to do but just hold still,  try  be ready to st from
under when  lightning struck.

I had just one little glimpse of  old gentleman when he come in; n
 bed hid him.  Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him,  says:

“Has he come?”

“No,” says her husb.

“Good-_ness_ gracious!” she says, “what in  warld can have become of
him?”

“I can’t imagine,” says  old gentleman; “ I must say it makes me
dreadful uneasy.”

“Uneasy!” she says; “I’m ready to go distracted!  He _must_ a come; 
you’ve missed him along  road.  I _know_ it’s so--something tells me
so.”

“Why, Sally, I _couldn’t_ miss him along  road--_you_ know that.”

“But oh, dear, dear, what _will_ Sis say!  He must a come!  You must a
missed him.  He--”

“Oh, don’t distress me any more’n I’m already distressed.  I don’t know
what in  world to make of it.  I’m at my wit’s end,  I don’t mind
acknowledging ‘t I’m right down scared.  But re’s no hope that he’s
come; for he _couldn’t_ come  me miss him.  Sally, it’s terrible--just
terrible--something’s happened to  boat, sure!”

“Why, Silas!  Look yonder!--up  road!--ain’t that somebody coming?”

He sprung to  window at  head of  bed,  that give Mrs.
Phelps  chance she wanted.  She stooped down quick at  foot of 
bed  give me a pull,  out I come;  when he turned back from 
window re she stood, a-beaming  a-smiling like a house afire, 
I sting pretty meek  sweaty alongside.   old gentleman stared,
 says:

“Why, who’s that?”

“Who do you reckon ‘t is?”

“I hain’t no idea.  Who _is_ it?”

“It’s _Tom Sawyer!_”

By jings, I most slumped through  floor!  But re warn’t no time to
swap knives;  old man grabbed me by  h  shook,  kept on
shaking;  all  time how  woman did dance around  laugh 
cry;  n how y both did fire off questions about Sid,  Mary,
  rest of  tribe.

But if y was joyful, it warn’t nothing to what I was; for it was like
being born again, I was so glad to find out who I was.  Well, y froze
to me for two hours;  at last, when my chin was so tired it couldn’t
hardly go any more, I had told m more about my family--I mean 
Sawyer family--than ever happened to any six Sawyer families.   I
explained all about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at  mouth of
White River,  it took us three days to fix it.  Which was all right,
 worked first-rate; because _y_ didn’t know but what it would take
three days to fix it.  If I’d a called it a bolad it would a done
just as well.

Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side,  pretty
uncomfortable all up  or.  Being Tom Sawyer was easy 
comfortable,  it stayed easy  comfortable till by  by I hear a
steamboat coughing along down  river.  n I says to myself, s’pose
Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat?   s’pose he steps in here any
minute,  sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep
quiet?

Well, I couldn’t _have_ it that way; it wouldn’t do at all.  I must go
up  road  waylay him.  So I told  folks I reckoned I would go
up to  town  fetch down my baggage.   old gentleman was for
going along with me, but I said no, I could drive  horse myself, 
I drur he wouldn’t take no trouble about me.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

SO I started for town in  wagon,  when I was half-way I see a
wagon coming,  sure enough it was Tom Sawyer,  I stopped 
waited till he come along.  I says “Hold on!”  it stopped alongside,
 his mouth opened up like a trunk,  stayed so;  he swallowed
two or three times like a person that’s got a dry throat,  n says:

“I hain’t ever done you no harm.  You know that.  So, n, what you
want to come back  ha’nt _me_ for?”

I says:

“I hain’t come back--I hain’t been _gone_.”

When he heard my voice it righted him up some, but he warn’t quite
satisfied yet.  He says:

“Don’t you play nothing on me, because I wouldn’t on you.  Honest injun
now, you ain’t a ghost?”

“Honest injun, I ain’t,” I says.

“Well--I--I--well, that ought to settle it, of course; but I can’t somehow
seem to underst it no way.  Looky here, warn’t you ever murdered _at
all?_”

“No.  I warn’t ever murdered at all--I played it on m.  You come in
here  feel of me if you don’t believe me.”

So he done it;  it satisfied him;  he was that glad to see me
again he didn’t know what to do.   he wanted to know all about it
right off, because it was a gr adventure,  mysterious,  so it
hit him where he lived.  But I said, leave it alone till by  by; 
told his driver to wait,  we drove off a little piece,  I told
him  kind of a fix I was in,  what did he reckon we better do?  He
said, let him alone a minute,  don’t disturb him.  So he thought 
thought,  pretty soon he says:

“It’s all right; I’ve got it.  Take my trunk in your wagon,  let on
it’s your’n;  you turn back  fool along slow, so as to get to 
house about  time you ought to;  I’ll go towards town a piece, 
take a fresh start,  get re a quarter or a half an hour after you;
 you needn’t let on to know me at first.”

I says:

“All right; but wait a minute.  re’s one more thing--a thing that
_nobody_ don’t know but me.   that is, re’s a nigger here that
I’m a-trying to steal out of slavery,  his name is _Jim_--old Miss
Watson’s Jim.”

He says:

“What!  Why, Jim is--”

He stopped  went to studying.  I says:

“I know what you’ll say.  You’ll say it’s dirty, low-down business; but
what if it is?  I’m low down;  I’m a-going to steal him,  I want
you keep mum  not let on.  Will you?”

His eye lit up,  he says:

“I’ll _help_ you steal him!”

Well, I let go all holts n, like I was shot.  It was  most
astonishing speech I ever heard-- I’m bound to say Tom Sawyer fell
considerable in my estimation.  Only I couldn’t believe it.  Tom Sawyer
a _nigger-stealer!_

“Oh, shucks!”  I says; “you’re joking.”

“I ain’t joking, eir.”

“Well, n,” I says, “joking or no joking, if you hear anything said
about a runaway nigger, don’t forget to remember that _you_ don’t know
nothing about him,  I don’t know nothing about him.”

n we took  trunk  put it in my wagon,  he drove off his
way  I drove mine.  But of course I forgot all about driving slow on
accounts of being glad  full of thinking; so I got home a heap too
quick for that length of a trip.   old gentleman was at  door, 
he says:

“Why, this is wonderful!  Whoever would a thought it was in that mare
to do it?  I wish we’d a timed her.   she hain’t sweated a hair--not
a hair. It’s wonderful.  Why, I wouldn’t take a hundred dollars for that
horse now--I wouldn’t, honest;  yet I’d a sold her for fifteen before,
 thought ‘twas all she was worth.”

That’s all he said.  He was  innocentest, best old soul I ever see.
But it warn’t surprising; because he warn’t only just a farmer, he was
a preacher, too,  had a little one-horse log church down back of 
plantation, which he built it himself at his own expense, for a church
 schoolhouse,  never charged nothing for his preaching,  it was
worth it, too.  re was plenty or farmer-preachers like that, 
done  same way, down South.

In about half an hour Tom’s wagon drove up to  front stile,  Aunt
Sally she see it through  window, because it was only about fifty
yards,  says:

“Why, re’s somebody come!  I wonder who ‘tis?  Why, I do believe it’s
a stranger.  Jimmy” (that’s one of  children) “run  tell Lize to
put on anor plate for dinner.”

Everybody made a rush for  front door, because, of course, a stranger
don’t come _every_ year,  so he lays over  yaller-fever, for
interest, when he does come.  Tom was over  stile  starting for
 house;  wagon was spinning up  road for  village,  we
was all bunched in  front door.  Tom had his store clos on,  an
audience-- that was always nuts for Tom Sawyer.  In m circumstances
it warn’t no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was
suitable.  He warn’t a boy to meeky along up that yard like a sheep; no,
he come ca’m  important, like  ram.  When he got a-front of us he
lifts his hat ever so gracious  dainty, like it was  lid of a box
that had butterflies asleep in it  he didn’t want to disturb m,
 says:

“Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume?”

“No, my boy,” says  old gentleman, “I’m sorry to say ‘t your driver
has deceived you; Nichols’s place is down a matter of three mile more.
Come in, come in.”

Tom he took a look back over his shoulder,  says, “Too late--he’s out
of sight.”

“Yes, he’s gone, my son,  you must come in  eat your dinner with
us;  n we’ll hitch up  take you down to Nichols’s.”

“Oh, I _can’t_ make you so much trouble; I couldn’t think of it.  I’ll
walk--I don’t mind  distance.”

“But we won’t _let_ you walk--it wouldn’t be Sourn hospitality to do
it. Come right in.”

“Oh, _do_,” says Aunt Sally; “it ain’t a bit of trouble to us, not a
bit in  world.  You must stay.  It’s a long, dusty three mile, 
we can’t let you walk.  , besides, I’ve already told ‘em to put on
anor plate when I see you coming; so you mustn’t disappoint us.  Come
right in  make yourself at home.”

So Tom he thanked m very hearty  hsome,  let himself be
persuaded,  come in;  when he was in he said he was a stranger
from Hicksville, Ohio,  his name was William Thompson-- he made
anor bow.

Well, he run on,  on,  on, making up stuff about Hicksville 
everybody in it he could invent,  I getting a little nervious, 
wondering how this was going to help me out of my scrape;  at last,
still talking along, he reached over  kissed Aunt Sally right on 
mouth,  n settled back again in his chair comfortable,  was
going on talking; but she jumped up  wiped it off with  back of
her h,  says:

“You owdacious puppy!”

He looked kind of hurt,  says:

“I’m surprised at you, m’am.”

“You’re s’rp--Why, what do you reckon I am?  I’ve a good notion to take
--Say, what do you mean by kissing me?”

He looked kind of humble,  says:

“I didn’t mean nothing, m’am.  I didn’t mean no harm.  I--I--thought you’d
like it.”

“Why, you born fool!”  She took up  spinning stick,  it looked
like it was all she could do to keep from giving him a crack with it.
 “What made you think I’d like it?”

“Well, I don’t know.  Only, y--y--told me you would.”

“_y_ told you I would.  Whoever told you’s _anor_ lunatic.  I
never heard  beat of it.  Who’s _y_?”

“Why, everybody.  y all said so, m’am.”

It was all she could do to hold in;  her eyes snapped,  her
fingers worked like she wanted to scratch him;  she says:

“Who’s ‘everybody’?  Out with ir names, or r’ll be an idiot
short.”

He got up  looked distressed,  fumbled his hat,  says:

“I’m sorry,  I warn’t expecting it.  y told me to.  y all told
me to.  y all said, kiss her;  said she’d like it.  y all said
it--every one of m.  But I’m sorry, m’am,  I won’t do it no more--I
won’t, honest.”

“You won’t, won’t you?  Well, I sh’d _reckon_ you won’t!”

“No’m, I’m honest about it; I won’t ever do it again--till you ask me.”

“Till I _ask_ you!  Well, I never see  beat of it in my born days!
 I lay you’ll be  Methusalem-numskull of creation before ever I ask
you--or  likes of you.”

“Well,” he says, “it does surprise me so.  I can’t make it out, somehow.
y said you would,  I thought you would.  But--” He stopped 
looked around slow, like he wished he could run across a friendly eye
somewheres,  fetched up on  old gentleman’s,  says, “Didn’t
_you_ think she’d like me to kiss her, sir?”

“Why, no; I--I--well, no, I b’lieve I didn’t.”

n he looks on around  same way to me,  says:

“Tom, didn’t _you_ think Aunt Sally ‘d open out her arms  say, ‘Sid
Sawyer--’”

“My l!” she says, breaking in  jumping for him, “you impudent
young rascal, to fool a body so--”  was going to hug him, but he
fended her off,  says:

“No, not till you’ve asked me first.”

So she didn’t lose no time, but asked him;  hugged him  kissed
him over  over again,  n turned him over to  old man,  he
took what was left.   after y got a little quiet again she says:

“Why, dear me, I never see such a surprise.  We warn’t looking for _you_
at all, but only Tom.  Sis never wrote to me about anybody coming but
him.”

“It’s because it warn’t _intended_ for any of us to come but Tom,” he
says; “but I begged  begged,  at  last minute she let me
come, too; so, coming down  river, me  Tom thought it would be a
first-rate surprise for him to come here to  house first,  for me
to by  by tag along  drop in,  let on to be a stranger.  But it
was a mistake, Aunt Sally.  This ain’t no healthy place for a stranger
to come.”

“No--not impudent whelps, Sid.  You ought to had your jaws boxed; I
hain’t been so put out since I don’t know when.  But I don’t care, I
don’t mind  terms--I’d be willing to st a thous such jokes to
have you here. Well, to think of that performance!  I don’t deny it, I
was most putrified with astonishment when you give me that smack.”

We had dinner out in that broad open passage betwixt  house 
 kitchen;  re was things enough on that table for seven
families-- all hot, too; none of your flabby, tough meat that’s laid
in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night  tastes like a hunk of
old cold cannibal in  morning.  Uncle Silas he asked a pretty long
blessing over it, but it was worth it;  it didn’t cool it a bit,
neir,  way I’ve seen m kind of interruptions do lots of times.
 re was a considerable good deal of talk all  afternoon,  me
 Tom was on  lookout all  time; but it warn’t no use, y
didn’t happen to say nothing about any runaway nigger,  we was afraid
to try to work up to it.  But at supper, at night, one of  little
boys says:

“Pa, mayn’t Tom  Sid  me go to  show?”

“No,” says  old man, “I reckon re ain’t going to be any;  you
couldn’t go if re was; because  runaway nigger told Burton 
me all about that scalous show,  Burton said he would tell 
people; so I reckon y’ve drove  owdacious loafers out of town
before this time.”

So re it was!--but I couldn’t help it.  Tom  me was to sleep in 
same room  bed; so, being tired, we bid good-night  went up to
bed right after supper,  clumb out of  window  down 
lightning-rod,  shoved for  town; for I didn’t believe anybody was
going to give  king   duke a hint,  so if I didn’t hurry up
 give m one y’d get into trouble sure.

On  road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned I was murdered,
 how pap disappeared pretty soon,  didn’t come back no more, 
what a stir re was when Jim run away;  I told Tom all about our
Royal Nonesuch rapscallions,  as much of  raft voyage as I had
time to;  as we struck into  town  up through   middle of
it--it was as much as half-after eight, n--here comes a raging rush of
people with torches,  an awful whooping  yelling,  banging tin
pans  blowing horns;  we jumped to one side to let m go by;
 as y went by I see y had  king   duke astraddle of a
rail--that is, I knowed it _was_  king   duke, though y was
all over tar  fears,  didn’t look like nothing in 
world that was human--just looked like a couple of monstrous big
soldier-plumes.  Well, it made me sick to see it;  I was sorry for
m poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like I couldn’t ever feel any
hardness against m any more in  world.  It was a dreadful thing to
see.  Human beings _can_ be awful cruel to one anor.

We see we was too late--couldn’t do no good.  We asked some stragglers
about it,  y said everybody went to  show looking very
innocent;  laid low  kept dark till  poor old king was in 
middle of his cavortings on  stage; n somebody give a signal, 
 house rose up  went for m.

So we poked along back home,  I warn’t feeling so brash as I was
before, but kind of ornery,  humble,  to blame, somehow--though
I hadn’t done nothing.  But that’s always  way; it don’t make no
difference wher you do right or wrong, a person’s conscience ain’t
got no sense,  just goes for him anyway.  If I had a yaller dog that
didn’t know no more than a person’s conscience does I would pison him.
It takes up more room than all  rest of a person’s insides,  yet
ain’t no good, nohow.  Tom Sawyer he says  same.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

WE stopped talking,  got to thinking.  By  by Tom says:

“Looky here, Huck, what fools we are to not think of it before!  I bet I
know where Jim is.”

“No!  Where?”

“In that hut down by  ash-hopper.  Why, looky here.  When we was at
dinner, didn’t you see a nigger man go in re with some vittles?”

“Yes.”

“What did you think  vittles was for?”

“For a dog.”

“So ‘d I. Well, it wasn’t for a dog.”

“Why?”

“Because part of it was watermelon.”

“So it was--I noticed it.  Well, it does beat all that I never thought
about a dog not eating watermelon.  It shows how a body can see 
don’t see at  same time.”

“Well,  nigger unlocked  padlock when he went in,  he locked it
again when he came out.  He fetched uncle a key about  time we got up
from table--same key, I bet.  Watermelon shows man, lock shows prisoner;
 it ain’t likely re’s two prisoners on such a little plantation,
 where  people’s all so kind  good.  Jim’s  prisoner.  All
right--I’m glad we found it out detective fashion; I wouldn’t give shucks
for any or way.  Now you work your mind,  study out a plan to
steal Jim,  I will study out one, too;  we’ll take  one we like
 best.”

What a head for just a boy to have!  If I had Tom Sawyer’s head I
wouldn’t trade it off to be a duke, nor mate of a steamboat, nor clown
in a circus, nor nothing I can think of.  I went to thinking out a plan,
but only just to be doing something; I knowed very well where  right
plan was going to come from.  Pretty soon Tom says:

“Ready?”

“Yes,” I says.

“All right--bring it out.”

“My plan is this,” I says.  “We can easy find out if it’s Jim in re.
n get up my canoe to-morrow night,  fetch my raft over from 
isl.  n  first dark night that comes steal  key out of 
old man’s britches after he goes to bed,  shove off down  river
on  raft with Jim, hiding daytimes  running nights,  way me 
Jim used to do before.  Wouldn’t that plan work?”

“_Work_?  Why, cert’nly it would work, like rats a-fighting.  But it’s
too blame’ simple; re ain’t nothing _to_ it.  What’s  good of a
plan that ain’t no more trouble than that?  It’s as mild as goose-milk.
 Why, Huck, it wouldn’t make no more talk than breaking into a soap
factory.”

I never said nothing, because I warn’t expecting nothing different; but
I knowed mighty well that whenever he got _his_ plan ready it wouldn’t
have none of m objections to it.

 it didn’t.  He told me what it was,  I see in a minute it was
worth fifteen of mine for style,  would make Jim just as free a man
as mine would,  maybe get us all killed besides.  So I was satisfied,
 said we would waltz in on it.  I needn’t tell what it was here,
because I knowed it wouldn’t stay  way, it was.  I knowed he would be
changing it around every which way as we went along,  heaving in new
bullinesses wherever he got a chance.   that is what he done.

Well, one thing was dead sure,  that was that Tom Sawyer was in
earnest,  was actuly going to help steal that nigger out of slavery.
That was  thing that was too many for me.  Here was a boy that was
respectable  well brung up;  had a character to lose;  folks at
home that had characters;  he was bright  not lear-headed; 
knowing  not ignorant;  not mean, but kind;  yet here he was,
without any more pride, or rightness, or feeling, than to stoop to
this business,  make himself a shame,  his family a shame,
before everybody.  I _couldn’t_ underst it no way at all.  It was
outrageous,  I knowed I ought to just up  tell him so;  so be
his true friend,  let him quit  thing right where he was  save
himself.  I _did_ start to tell him; but he shut me up,  says:

“Don’t you reckon I know what I’m about?  Don’t I generly know what I’m
about?”

“Yes.”

“Didn’t I _say_ I was going to help steal  nigger?”

“Yes.”

“_Well_, n.”

That’s all he said,  that’s all I said.  It warn’t no use to say any
more; because when he said he’d do a thing, he always done it.  But I
couldn’t make out how he was willing to go into this thing; so I just
let it go,  never bored no more about it.  If he was bound to have
it so, I couldn’t help it.

When we got home  house was all dark  still; so we went on down to
 hut by  ash-hopper for to examine it.  We went through  yard
so as to see what  hounds would do.  y knowed us,  didn’t make
no more noise than country dogs is always doing when anything comes by
in  night.  When we got to  cabin we took a look at  front 
 two sides;  on  side I warn’t acquainted with--which was 
north side--we found a square window-hole, up tolerable high, with just
one stout board nailed across it.  I says:

“Here’s  ticket.  This hole’s big enough for Jim to get through if we
wrench off  board.”

Tom says:

“It’s as simple as tit-tat-toe, three-in-a-row,  as easy as
playing hooky.  I should _hope_ we can find a way that’s a little more
complicated than _that_, Huck Finn.”

“Well, n,” I says, “how ‘ll it do to saw him out,  way I done
before I was murdered that time?”

“That’s more _like_,” he says.  “It’s real mysterious,  troublesome,
 good,” he says; “but I bet we can find a way that’s twice as long.
 re ain’t no hurry; le’s keep on looking around.”

Betwixt  hut   fence, on  back side, was a lean-to that
joined  hut at  eaves,  was made out of plank.  It was as long
as  hut, but narrow--only about six foot wide.   door to it was at
 south end,  was padlocked.  Tom he went to  soap-kettle 
searched around,  fetched back  iron thing y lift  lid with;
so he took it  prized out one of  staples.   chain fell down,
 we opened  door  went in,  shut it,  struck a match,
 see  shed was only built against a cabin  hadn’t no connection
with it;  re warn’t no floor to  shed, nor nothing in it but
some old rusty played-out hoes  spades  picks  a crippled plow.
  match went out,  so did we,  shoved in  staple again, 
 door was locked as good as ever. Tom was joyful.  He says;

“Now we’re all right.  We’ll _dig_ him out.  It ‘ll take about a week!”

n we started for  house,  I went in  back door--you only have
to pull a buckskin latch-string, y don’t fasten  doors--but that
warn’t romantical enough for Tom Sawyer; no way would do him but he must
climb up  lightning-rod.  But after he got up half way about three
times,  missed fire  fell every time,   last time most
busted his brains out, he thought he’d got to give it up; but after he
was rested he allowed he would give her one more turn for luck,  this
time he made  trip.

In  morning we was up at break of day,  down to  nigger cabins
to pet  dogs  make friends with  nigger that fed Jim--if it
_was_ Jim that was being fed.   niggers was just getting through
breakfast  starting for  fields;  Jim’s nigger was piling up
a tin pan with bread  meat  things;  whilst  ors was
leaving,  key come from  house.

This nigger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face,  his wool was
all tied up in little bunches with thread.  That was to keep witches
off.  He said  witches was pestering him awful se nights, 
making him see all kinds of strange things,  hear all kinds of
strange words  noises,  he didn’t believe he was ever witched so
long before in his life.  He got so worked up,  got to running on so
about his troubles, he forgot all about what he’d been a-going to do.
 So Tom says:

“What’s  vittles for?  Going to feed  dogs?”

 nigger kind of smiled around gradually over his face, like when you
heave a brickbat in a mud-puddle,  he says:

“Yes, Mars Sid, A dog.  Cur’us dog, too.  Does you want to go en look at
‘im?”

“Yes.”

I hunched Tom,  whispers:

“You going, right here in  daybreak?  _that_ warn’t  plan.”

“No, it warn’t; but it’s  plan _now_.”

So, drat him, we went along, but I didn’t like it much.  When we got in
we couldn’t hardly see anything, it was so dark; but Jim was re, sure
enough,  could see us;  he sings out:

“Why, _Huck_!  En good _lan_’! ain’ dat Misto Tom?”

I just knowed how it would be; I just expected it.  I didn’t know
nothing to do;  if I had I couldn’t a done it, because that nigger
busted in  says:

“Why, de gracious sakes! do he know you genlmen?”

We could see pretty well now.  Tom he looked at  nigger, steady 
kind of wondering,  says:

“Does _who_ know us?”

“Why, dis-yer runaway nigger.”

“I don’t reckon he does; but what put that into your head?”

“What _put_ it dar?  Didn’ he jis’ dis minute sing out like he knowed
you?”

Tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way:

“Well, that’s mighty curious.  _Who_ sung out? _when_ did he sing out?
 _what_ did he sing out?”  turns to me, perfectly ca’m,  says,
“Did _you_ hear anybody sing out?”

Of course re warn’t nothing to be said but  one thing; so I says:

“No; I ain’t heard nobody say nothing.”

n he turns to Jim,  looks him over like he never see him before,
 says:

“Did you sing out?”

“No, sah,” says Jim; “I hain’t said nothing, sah.”

“Not a word?”

“No, sah, I hain’t said a word.”

“Did you ever see us before?”

“No, sah; not as I knows on.”

So Tom turns to  nigger, which was looking wild  distressed, 
says, kind of severe:

“What do you reckon’s  matter with you, anyway?  What made you think
somebody sung out?”

“Oh, it’s de dad-blame’ witches, sah, en I wisht I was dead, I do.
 Dey’s awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos’ kill me, dey sk’yers me so.
 Please to don’t tell nobody ‘bout it sah, er ole Mars Silas he’ll scole
me; ‘kase he say dey _ain’t_ no witches.  I jis’ wish to goodness he was
heah now--_den_ what would he say!  I jis’ bet he couldn’ fine no way to
git aroun’ it _dis_ time.  But it’s awluz jis’ so; people dat’s _sot_,
stays sot; dey won’t look into noth’n’en fine it out f’r deyselves, en
when _you_ fine it out en tell um ‘bout it, dey doan’ b’lieve you.”

Tom give him a dime,  said we wouldn’t tell nobody;  told him to
buy some more thread to tie up his wool with;  n looks at Jim, 
says:

“I wonder if Uncle Silas is going to hang this nigger.  If I was to
catch a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run away, I wouldn’t give
him up, I’d hang him.”   whilst  nigger stepped to  door to
look at  dime  bite it to see if it was good, he whispers to Jim
 says:

“Don’t ever let on to know us.   if you hear any digging going on
nights, it’s us; we’re going to set you free.”

Jim only had time to grab us by  h  squeeze it; n  nigger
come back,  we said we’d come again some time if  nigger wanted
us to;  he said he would, more particular if it was dark, because 
witches went for him mostly in  dark,  it was good to have folks
around n.




CHAPTER XXXV.

IT would be most an hour yet till breakfast, so we left  struck down
into  woods; because Tom said we got to have _some_ light to see how
to dig by,  a lantern makes too much,  might get us into trouble;
what we must have was a lot of m rotten chunks that’s called
fox-fire,  just makes a soft kind of a glow when you lay m in a
dark place.  We fetched an armful  hid it in  weeds,  set down
to rest,  Tom says, kind of dissatisfied:

“Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy  awkward as it can be.
 so it makes it so rotten difficult to get up a difficult plan.
 re ain’t no watchman to be drugged--now re _ought_ to be a
watchman.  re ain’t even a dog to give a sleeping-mixture to.  
re’s Jim chained by one leg, with a ten-foot chain, to  leg of his
bed:  why, all you got to do is to lift up  bedstead  slip off
 chain.   Uncle Silas he trusts everybody; sends  key to 
punkin-headed nigger,  don’t send nobody to watch  nigger.  Jim
could a got out of that window-hole before this, only re wouldn’t be
no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his leg.  Why, drat it,
Huck, it’s  stupidest arrangement I ever see. You got to invent _all_
 difficulties.  Well, we can’t help it; we got to do  best we can
with  materials we’ve got. Anyhow, re’s one thing--re’s more
honor in getting him out through a lot of difficulties  dangers,
where re warn’t one of m furnished to you by  people who it was
ir duty to furnish m,  you had to contrive m all out of your
own head.  Now look at just that one thing of  lantern.  When you
come down to  cold facts, we simply got to _let on_ that a lantern’s
resky.  Why, we could work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to,
I believe.  Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up something to
make a saw out of  first chance we get.”

“What do we want of a saw?”

“What do we _want_ of it?  Hain’t we got to saw  leg of Jim’s bed
off, so as to get  chain loose?”

“Why, you just said a body could lift up  bedstead  slip  chain
off.”

“Well, if that ain’t just like you, Huck Finn.  You _can_ get up 
infant-schooliest ways of going at a thing.  Why, hain’t you ever read
any books at all?--Baron Trenck, nor Casanova, nor Benvenuto Chelleeny,
nor Henri IV., nor none of m heroes?  Who ever heard of getting a
prisoner loose in such an old-maidy way as that?  No;  way all 
best authorities does is to saw  bed-leg in two,  leave it just
so,  swallow  sawdust, so it can’t be found,  put some dirt 
grease around  sawed place so  very keenest seneskal can’t see
no sign of it’s being sawed,  thinks  bed-leg is perfectly sound.
n,  night you’re ready, fetch  leg a kick, down she goes; slip
off your chain,  re you are.  Nothing to do but hitch your
rope ladder to  battlements, shin down it, break your leg in 
moat--because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know--
re’s your horses  your trusty vassles,  y scoop you up 
fling you across a saddle,  away you go to your native Langudoc, or
Navarre, or wherever it is. It’s gaudy, Huck.  I wish re was a moat
to this cabin. If we get time,  night of  escape, we’ll dig one.”

I says:

“What do we want of a moat when we’re going to snake him out from under
 cabin?”

But he never heard me.  He had forgot me  everything else.  He had
his chin in his h, thinking.  Pretty soon he sighs  shakes his
head; n sighs again,  says:

“No, it wouldn’t do--re ain’t necessity enough for it.”

“For what?”  I says.

“Why, to saw Jim’s leg off,” he says.

“Good l!”  I says; “why, re ain’t _no_ necessity for it.   what
would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway?”

“Well, some of  best authorities has done it.  y couldn’t get 
chain off, so y just cut ir h off  shoved.   a leg would
be better still.  But we got to let that go.  re ain’t necessity
enough in this case; , besides, Jim’s a nigger,  wouldn’t
underst  reasons for it,  how it’s  custom in Europe; so
we’ll let it go.  But re’s one thing--he can have a rope ladder; we
can tear up our sheets  make him a rope ladder easy enough.   we
can send it to him in a pie; it’s mostly done that way.   I’ve et
worse pies.”

“Why, Tom Sawyer, how you talk,” I says; “Jim ain’t got no use for a
rope ladder.”

“He _has_ got use for it.  How _you_ talk, you better say; you don’t
know nothing about it.  He’s _got_ to have a rope ladder; y all do.”

“What in  nation can he _do_ with it?”

“_Do_ with it?  He can hide it in his bed, can’t he?”  That’s what y
all do;  _he’s_ got to, too.  Huck, you don’t ever seem to want to do
anything that’s regular; you want to be starting something fresh all 
time. S’pose he _don’t_ do nothing with it? ain’t it re in his bed,
for a clew, after he’s gone?  don’t you reckon y’ll want clews?
 Of course y will.   you wouldn’t leave m any?  That would be a
_pretty_ howdy-do, _wouldn’t_ it!  I never heard of such a thing.”

“Well,” I says, “if it’s in  regulations,  he’s got to have
it, all right, let him have it; because I don’t wish to go back on no
regulations; but re’s one thing, Tom Sawyer--if we go to tearing up
our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder, we’re going to get into trouble
with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you’re born.  Now,  way I look at
it, a hickry-bark ladder don’t cost nothing,  don’t waste nothing,
 is just as good to load up a pie with,  hide in a straw tick,
as any rag ladder you can start;  as for Jim, he ain’t had no
experience,  so he don’t care what kind of a--”

“Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, if I was as ignorant as you I’d keep
still--that’s what I’D do.  Who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping
by a hickry-bark ladder?  Why, it’s perfectly ridiculous.”

“Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way; but if you’ll take my
advice, you’ll let me borrow a sheet off of  closline.”

He said that would do.   that gave him anor idea,  he says:

“Borrow a shirt, too.”

“What do we want of a shirt, Tom?”

“Want it for Jim to keep a journal on.”

“Journal your granny--_Jim_ can’t write.”

“S’pose he _can’t_ write--he can make marks on  shirt, can’t he, if
we make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron
barrel-hoop?”

“Why, Tom, we can pull a fear out of a goose  make him a better
one;  quicker, too.”

“_Prisoners_ don’t have geese running around  donjon-keep to pull
pens out of, you muggins.  y _always_ make ir pens out of 
hardest, toughest, troublesomest piece of old brass clestick or
something like that y can get ir hs on;  it takes m weeks
 weeks  months  months to file it out, too, because y’ve got
to do it by rubbing it on  wall.  _y_ wouldn’t use a goose-quill
if y had it. It ain’t regular.”

“Well, n, what’ll we make him  ink out of?”

“Many makes it out of iron-rust  tears; but that’s  common sort
 women;  best authorities uses ir own blood.  Jim can do that;
 when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message
to let  world know where he’s captivated, he can write it on 
bottom of a tin plate with a fork  throw it out of  window.  
Iron Mask always done that,  it’s a blame’ good way, too.”

“Jim ain’t got no tin plates.  y feed him in a pan.”

“That ain’t nothing; we can get him some.”

“Can’t nobody _read_ his plates.”

“That ain’t got anything to _do_ with it, Huck Finn.  All _he’s_ got to
do is to write on  plate  throw it out.  You don’t _have_ to be
able to read it. Why, half  time you can’t read anything a prisoner
writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else.”

“Well, n, what’s  sense in wasting  plates?”

“Why, blame it all, it ain’t  _prisoner’s_ plates.”

“But it’s _somebody’s_ plates, ain’t it?”

“Well, spos’n it is?  What does  _prisoner_ care whose--”

He broke off re, because we heard  breakfast-horn blowing.  So we
cleared out for  house.

Along during  morning I borrowed a sheet  a white shirt off of 
clos-line;  I found an old sack  put m in it,  we went
down  got  fox-fire,  put that in too.  I called it borrowing,
because that was what pap always called it; but Tom said it warn’t
borrowing, it was stealing.  He said we was representing prisoners; 
prisoners don’t care how y get a thing so y get it,  nobody
don’t blame m for it, eir.  It ain’t no crime in a prisoner to
steal  thing he needs to get away with, Tom said; it’s his right; 
so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we had a perfect right to
steal anything on this place we had  least use for to get ourselves
out of prison with.  He said if we warn’t prisoners it would be a very
different thing,  nobody but a mean, ornery person would steal when
he warn’t a prisoner.  So we allowed we would steal everything re was
that come hy.   yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that,
when I stole a watermelon out of  nigger-patch  eat it;  he
made me go  give  niggers a dime without telling m what it
was for. Tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we
_needed_. Well, I says, I needed  watermelon.  But he said I didn’t
need it to get out of prison with; re’s where  difference was.
 He said if I’d a wanted it to hide a knife in,  smuggle it to Jim
to kill  seneskal with, it would a been all right.  So I let it go at
that, though I couldn’t see no advantage in my representing a prisoner
if I got to set down  chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like
that every time I see a chance to hog a watermelon.

Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning till everybody was settled
down to business,  nobody in sight around  yard; n Tom he
carried  sack into  lean-to whilst I stood off a piece to keep
watch.  By  by he come out,  we went  set down on  woodpile
to talk.  He says:

“Everything’s all right now except tools;  that’s easy fixed.”

“Tools?”  I says.

“Yes.”

“Tools for what?”

“Why, to dig with.  We ain’t a-going to _gnaw_ him out, are we?”

“Ain’t m old crippled picks  things in re good enough to dig a
nigger out with?”  I says.

He turns on me, looking pitying enough to make a body cry,  says:

“Huck Finn, did you _ever_ hear of a prisoner having picks  shovels,
 all  modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with?
 Now I want to ask you--if you got any reasonableness in you at all--what
kind of a show would _that_ give him to be a hero?  Why, y might as
well lend him  key  done with it.  Picks  shovels--why, y
wouldn’t furnish ‘em to a king.”

“Well, n,” I says, “if we don’t want  picks  shovels, what do
we want?”

“A couple of case-knives.”

“To dig  foundations out from under that cabin with?”

“Yes.”

“Confound it, it’s foolish, Tom.”

“It don’t make no difference how foolish it is, it’s  _right_ way--
it’s  regular way.   re ain’t no _or_ way, that ever I heard
of,  I’ve read all  books that gives any information about se
things. y always dig out with a case-knife-- not through dirt, mind
you; generly it’s through solid rock.   it takes m weeks  weeks
 weeks,  for ever  ever.  Why, look at one of m prisoners in
 bottom dungeon of  Castle Deef, in  harbor of Marseilles, that
dug himself out that way; how long was _he_ at it, you reckon?”

“I don’t know.”

“Well, guess.”

“I don’t know.  A month  a half.”

“_Thirty-seven year_-- he come out in China.  _That’s_  kind.  I
wish  bottom of _this_ fortress was solid rock.”

“_Jim_ don’t know nobody in China.”

“What’s _that_ got to do with it?  Neir did that or fellow.  But
you’re always a-wering off on a side issue.  Why can’t you stick to
 main point?”

“All right--I don’t care where he comes out, so he _comes_ out;  Jim
don’t, eir, I reckon.  But re’s one thing, anyway--Jim’s too old to
be dug out with a case-knife.  He won’t last.”

“Yes he will _last_, too.  You don’t reckon it’s going to take
thirty-seven years to dig out through a _dirt_ foundation, do you?”

“How long will it take, Tom?”

“Well, we can’t resk being as long as we ought to, because it mayn’t
take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down re by New Orleans.
 He’ll hear Jim ain’t from re.  n his next move will be to
advertise Jim, or something like that.  So we can’t resk being as long
digging him out as we ought to.  By rights I reckon we ought to be
a couple of years; but we can’t.  Things being so uncertain, what I
recommend is this:  that we really dig right in, as quick as we can;
 after that, we can _let on_, to ourselves, that we was at it
thirty-seven years.  n we can snatch him out  rush him away 
first time re’s an alarm.  Yes, I reckon that ‘ll be  best way.”

“Now, re’s _sense_ in that,” I says.  “Letting on don’t cost nothing;
letting on ain’t no trouble;  if it’s any object, I don’t mind
letting on we was at it a hundred  fifty year.  It wouldn’t strain
me none, after I got my h in.  So I’ll mosey along now,  smouch a
couple of case-knives.”

“Smouch three,” he says; “we want one to make a saw out of.”

“Tom, if it ain’t unregular  irreligious to sejest it,” I says,
“re’s an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under 
wear-boarding behind  smoke-house.”

He looked kind of weary  discouraged-like,  says:

“It ain’t no use to try to learn you nothing, Huck.  Run along 
smouch  knives--three of m.”  So I done it.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

AS soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down 
lightning-rod,  shut ourselves up in  lean-to,  got out our
pile of fox-fire,  went to work.  We cleared everything out of 
way, about four or five foot along  middle of  bottom log.  Tom
said he was right behind Jim’s bed now,  we’d dig in under it, 
when we got through re couldn’t nobody in  cabin ever know re
was any hole re, because Jim’s counter-pin hung down most to 
ground,  you’d have to raise it up  look under to see  hole.
 So we dug  dug with  case-knives till most midnight;  n
we was dog-tired,  our hs was blistered,  yet you couldn’t see
we’d done anything hardly.  At last I says:

“This ain’t no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job,
Tom Sawyer.”

He never said nothing.  But he sighed,  pretty soon he stopped
digging,  n for a good little while I knowed that he was thinking.
n he says:

“It ain’t no use, Huck, it ain’t a-going to work.  If we was prisoners
it would, because n we’d have as many years as we wanted,  no
hurry;  we wouldn’t get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while
y was changing watches,  so our hs wouldn’t get blistered, 
we could keep it up right along, year in  year out,  do it right,
  way it ought to be done.  But _we_ can’t fool along; we got to
rush; we ain’t got no time to spare.  If we was to put in anor
night this way we’d have to knock off for a week to let our hs get
well--couldn’t touch a case-knife with m sooner.”

“Well, n, what we going to do, Tom?”

“I’ll tell you.  It ain’t right,  it ain’t moral,  I wouldn’t like
it to get out; but re ain’t only just  one way:  we got to dig him
out with  picks,  _let on_ it’s case-knives.”

“_Now_ you’re _talking_!”  I says; “your head gets leveler  leveler
all  time, Tom Sawyer,” I says.  “Picks is  thing, moral or no
moral;  as for me, I don’t care shucks for  morality of it, nohow.
 When I start in to steal a nigger, or a watermelon, or a Sunday-school
book, I ain’t no ways particular how it’s done so it’s done.  What I
want is my nigger; or what I want is my watermelon; or what I want is my
Sunday-school book;  if a pick’s  hiest thing, that’s  thing
I’m a-going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that Sunday-school
book out with;  I don’t give a dead rat what  authorities thinks
about it nur.”

“Well,” he says, “re’s excuse for picks  letting-on in a case like
this; if it warn’t so, I wouldn’t approve of it, nor I wouldn’t st by
 see  rules broke--because right is right,  wrong is wrong,
 a body ain’t got no business doing wrong when he ain’t ignorant 
knows better.  It might answer for _you_ to dig Jim out with a pick,
_without_ any letting on, because you don’t know no better; but it
wouldn’t for me, because I do know better.  Gimme a case-knife.”

He had his own by him, but I hed him mine.  He flung it down, 
says:

“Gimme a _case-knife_.”

I didn’t know just what to do--but n I thought.  I scratched around
amongst  old tools,  got a pickaxe  give it to him,  he took
it  went to work,  never said a word.

He was always just that particular.  Full of principle.

So n I got a shovel,  n we picked  shoveled, turn about,
 made  fur fly.  We stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as
long as we could st up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for
it. When I got up stairs I looked out at  window  see Tom doing
his level best with  lightning-rod, but he couldn’t come it, his
hs was so sore.  At last he says:

“It ain’t no use, it can’t be done.  What you reckon I better do?  Can’t
you think of no way?”

“Yes,” I says, “but I reckon it ain’t regular.  Come up  stairs, 
let on it’s a lightning-rod.”

So he done it.

Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon  a brass clestick in  house,
for to make some pens for Jim out of,  six tallow cles;  I
hung around  nigger cabins  laid for a chance,  stole three tin
plates.  Tom says it wasn’t enough; but I said nobody wouldn’t ever see
 plates that Jim throwed out, because y’d fall in  dog-fennel
 jimpson weeds under  window-hole--n we could tote m back 
he could use m over again.  So Tom was satisfied.  n he says:

“Now,  thing to study out is, how to get  things to Jim.”

“Take m in through  hole,” I says, “when we get it done.”

He only just looked scornful,  said something about nobody ever heard
of such an idiotic idea,  n he went to studying.  By  by he
said he had ciphered out two or three ways, but re warn’t no need to
decide on any of m yet.  Said we’d got to post Jim first.

That night we went down  lightning-rod a little after ten,  took
one of  cles along,  listened under  window-hole,  heard
Jim snoring; so we pitched it in,  it didn’t wake him.  n we
whirled in with  pick  shovel,  in about two hours  a half
 job was done.  We crept in under Jim’s bed  into  cabin, 
pawed around  found  cle  lit it,  stood over Jim awhile,
 found him looking hearty  healthy,  n we woke him up gentle
 gradual.  He was so glad to see us he most cried;  called us
honey,  all  pet names he could think of;  was for having us
hunt up a cold-chisel to cut  chain off of his leg with right away,
 clearing out without losing any time.  But Tom he showed him how
unregular it would be,  set down  told him all about our plans,
 how we could alter m in a minute any time re was an alarm; 
not to be  least afraid, because we would see he got away, _sure_.
 So Jim he said it was all right,  we set re  talked over old
times awhile,  n Tom asked a lot of questions,  when Jim told
him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him,  Aunt
Sally come in to see if he was comfortable  had plenty to eat, 
both of m was kind as y could be, Tom says:

“_Now_ I know how to fix it.  We’ll send you some things by m.”

I said, “Don’t do nothing of  kind; it’s one of  most jackass
ideas I ever struck;” but he never paid no attention to me; went right
on.  It was his way when he’d got his plans set.

So he told Jim how we’d have to smuggle in  rope-ladder pie  or
large things by Nat,  nigger that fed him,  he must be on 
lookout,  not be surprised,  not let Nat see him open m; 
we would put small things in uncle’s coat-pockets  he must steal m
out;  we would tie things to aunt’s apron-strings or put m in her
apron-pocket, if we got a chance;  told him what y would be 
what y was for.   told him how to keep a journal on  shirt with
his blood,  all that. He told him everything.  Jim he couldn’t see
no sense in  most of it, but he allowed we was white folks  knowed
better than him; so he was satisfied,  said he would do it all just
as Tom said.

Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes  tobacco; so we had a right down good
sociable time; n we crawled out through  hole,  so home to
bed, with hs that looked like y’d been chawed.  Tom was in high
spirits. He said it was  best fun he ever had in his life,  
most intellectural;  said if he only could see his way to it we would
keep it up all  rest of our lives  leave Jim to our children to
get out; for he believed Jim would come to like it better  better 
more he got used to it.  He said that in that way it could be strung out
to as much as eighty year,  would be  best time on record.   he
said it would make us all celebrated that had a h in it.

In  morning we went out to  woodpile  chopped up  brass
clestick into hy sizes,  Tom put m   pewter spoon in
his pocket.  n we went to  nigger cabins,  while I got Nat’s
notice off, Tom shoved a piece of clestick into  middle of a
corn-pone that was in Jim’s pan,  we went along with Nat to see how
it would work,  it just worked noble; when Jim bit into it it most
mashed all his teeth out;  re warn’t ever anything could a worked
better. Tom said so himself. Jim he never let on but what it was only
just a piece of rock or something like that that’s always getting into
bread, you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he
jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first.

 whilst we was a-sting re in  dimmish light, here comes a
couple of  hounds bulging in from under Jim’s bed;  y kept on
piling in till re was eleven of m,  re warn’t hardly room
in re to get your breath.  By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to
door!   nigger Nat he only just hollered “Witches” once,  keeled
over on to  floor amongst  dogs,  begun to groan like he was
dying.  Tom jerked  door open  flung out a slab of Jim’s meat,
  dogs went for it,  in two seconds he was out himself  back
again  shut  door,  I knowed he’d fixed  or door too.
n he went to work on  nigger, coaxing him  petting him, 
asking him if he’d been imagining he saw something again.  He raised up,
 blinked his eyes around,  says:

“Mars Sid, you’ll say I’s a fool, but if I didn’t b’lieve I see most a
million dogs, er devils, er some’n, I wisht I may die right heah in dese
tracks.  I did, mos’ sholy.  Mars Sid, I _felt_ um--I _felt_ um, sah; dey
was all over me.  Dad fetch it, I jis’ wisht I could git my han’s on one
er dem witches jis’ wunst--on’y jis’ wunst--it’s all I’d ast.  But mos’ly
I wisht dey’d lemme ‘lone, I does.”

Tom says:

“Well, I tell you what I think.  What makes m come here just at this
runaway nigger’s breakfast-time?  It’s because y’re hungry; that’s
 reason.  You make m a witch pie; that’s  thing for _you_ to
do.”

“But my lan’, Mars Sid, how’s I gwyne to make ‘m a witch pie?  I doan’
know how to make it.  I hain’t ever hearn er sich a thing b’fo’.”

“Well, n, I’ll have to make it myself.”

“Will you do it, honey?--will you?  I’ll wusshup de groun’ und’ yo’ foot,
I will!”

“All right, I’ll do it, seeing it’s you,  you’ve been good to us 
showed us  runaway nigger.  But you got to be mighty careful.  When
we come around, you turn your back;  n whatever we’ve put in 
pan, don’t you let on you see it at all.   don’t you look when Jim
unloads  pan--something might happen, I don’t know what.   above
all, don’t you _hle_  witch-things.”

“_Hannel ‘M_, Mars Sid?  What _is_ you a-talkin’ ‘bout?  I wouldn’
lay de weight er my finger on um, not f’r ten hund’d thous’n billion
dollars, I wouldn’t.”




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THAT was all fixed.  So n we went away  went to  rubbage-pile
in  back yard, where y keep  old boots,  rags,  pieces
of bottles,  wore-out tin things,  all such truck,  scratched
around  found an old tin washpan,  stopped up  holes as well as
we could, to bake  pie in,  took it down cellar  stole it full
of flour  started for breakfast,  found a couple of shingle-nails
that Tom said would be hy for a prisoner to scrabble his name 
sorrows on  dungeon walls with,  dropped one of m in Aunt
Sally’s apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair,  t’or we stuck
in  b of Uncle Silas’s hat, which was on  bureau, because we
heard  children say ir pa  ma was going to  runaway nigger’s
house this morning,  n went to breakfast,  Tom dropped 
pewter spoon in Uncle Silas’s coat-pocket,  Aunt Sally wasn’t come
yet, so we had to wait a little while.

 when she come she was hot  red  cross,  couldn’t hardly
wait for  blessing;  n she went to sluicing out coffee with one
h  cracking  hiest child’s head with her thimble with 
or,  says:

“I’ve hunted high  I’ve hunted low,  it does beat all what _has_
become of your or shirt.”

My heart fell down amongst my lungs  livers  things,  a hard
piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it  got met on 
road with a cough,  was shot across  table,  took one of 
children in  eye  curled him up like a fishing-worm,  let a cry
out of him  size of a warwhoop,  Tom he turned kinder blue around
 gills,  it all amounted to a considerable state of things for
about a quarter of a minute or as much as that,  I would a sold out
for half price if re was a bidder.  But after that we was all right
again--it was  sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of cold.
Uncle Silas he says:

“It’s most uncommon curious, I can’t underst it.  I know perfectly
well I took it _off_, because--”

“Because you hain’t got but one _on_.  Just _listen_ at  man!  I know
you took it off,  know it by a better way than your wool-gering
memory, too, because it was on  clo’s-line yesterday--I see it re
myself. But it’s gone, that’s  long   short of it,  you’ll
just have to change to a red flann’l one till I can get time to make a
new one.  it ‘ll be  third I’ve made in two years.  It just keeps
a body on  jump to keep you in shirts;  whatever you do manage to
_do_ with ‘m all is more’n I can make out.  A body ‘d think you _would_
learn to take some sort of care of ‘em at your time of life.”

“I know it, Sally,  I do try all I can.  But it oughtn’t to be
altoger my fault, because, you know, I don’t see m nor have
nothing to do with m except when y’re on me;  I don’t believe
I’ve ever lost one of m _off_ of me.”

“Well, it ain’t _your_ fault if you haven’t, Silas; you’d a done it
if you could, I reckon.    shirt ain’t all that’s gone, nur.
 r’s a spoon gone;  _that_ ain’t all.  re was ten,  now
r’s only nine.  calf got  shirt, I reckon, but  calf never
took  spoon, _that’s_ certain.”

“Why, what else is gone, Sally?”

“r’s six _cles_ gone--that’s what.   rats could a got 
cles,  I reckon y did; I wonder y don’t walk off with 
whole place,  way you’re always going to stop ir holes  don’t
do it;  if y warn’t fools y’d sleep in your hair, Silas--_you’d_
never find it out; but you can’t lay  _spoon_ on  rats,  that I
know.”

“Well, Sally, I’m in fault,  I acknowledge it; I’ve been remiss; but
I won’t let to-morrow go by without stopping up m holes.”

“Oh, I wouldn’t hurry; next year ‘ll do.  Matilda Angelina Araminta
_Phelps!_”

Whack comes  thimble,   child snatches her claws out of 
sugar-bowl without fooling around any.  Just n  nigger woman steps
on to  passage,  says:

“Missus, dey’s a sheet gone.”

“A _sheet_ gone!  Well, for  l’s sake!”

“I’ll stop up m holes to-day,” says Uncle Silas, looking sorrowful.

“Oh, _do_ shet up!--s’pose  rats took  _sheet_?  _where’s_ it gone,
Lize?”

“Clah to goodness I hain’t no notion, Miss’ Sally.  She wuz on de
clo’sline yistiddy, but she done gone:  she ain’ dah no mo’ now.”

“I reckon  world _is_ coming to an end.  I _never_ see  beat of it
in all my born days.  A shirt,  a sheet,  a spoon,  six can--”

“Missus,” comes a young yaller wench, “dey’s a brass cannelstick
miss’n.”

“Cler out from here, you hussy, er I’ll take a skillet to ye!”

Well, she was just a-biling.  I begun to lay for a chance; I reckoned
I would sneak out  go for  woods till  wear moderated.  She
kept a-raging right along, running her insurrection all by herself, 
everybody else mighty meek  quiet;  at last Uncle Silas, looking
kind of foolish, fishes up that spoon out of his pocket.  She stopped,
with her mouth open  her hs up;  as for me, I wished I was in
Jeruslem or somewheres. But not long, because she says:

“It’s _just_ as I expected.  So you had it in your pocket all  time;
 like as not you’ve got  or things re, too.  How’d it get
re?”

“I reely don’t know, Sally,” he says, kind of apologizing, “or you know
I would tell.  I was a-studying over my text in Acts Seventeen before
breakfast,  I reckon I put it in re, not noticing, meaning to put
my Testament in,  it must be so, because my Testament ain’t in; but
I’ll go  see;  if  Testament is where I had it, I’ll know I
didn’t put it in,  that will show that I laid  Testament down 
took up  spoon, --”

“Oh, for  l’s sake!  Give a body a rest!  Go ‘long now,  whole
kit  biling of ye;  don’t come nigh me again till I’ve got back my
peace of mind.”

I’D a heard her if she’d a said it to herself, let alone speaking it
out;  I’d a got up  obeyed her if I’d a been dead.  As we was
passing through  setting-room  old man he took up his hat,  
shingle-nail fell out on  floor,  he just merely picked it up 
laid it on  mantel-shelf,  never said nothing,  went out.  Tom
see him do it,  remembered about  spoon,  says:

“Well, it ain’t no use to send things by _him_ no more, he ain’t
reliable.” n he says:  “But he done us a good turn with  spoon,
anyway, without knowing it,  so we’ll go  do him one without _him_
knowing it--stop up his rat-holes.”

re was a noble good lot of m down cellar,  it took us a whole
hour, but we done  job tight  good  shipshape.  n we heard
steps on  stairs,  blowed out our light  hid;  here comes
 old man, with a cle in one h  a bundle of stuff in t’or,
looking as absent-minded as year before last.  He went a mooning around,
first to one rat-hole  n anor, till he’d been to m all.
 n he stood about five minutes, picking tallow-drip off of his cle
 thinking.  n he turns off slow  dreamy towards  stairs,
saying:

“Well, for  life of me I can’t remember when I done it.  I could
show her now that I warn’t to blame on account of  rats.  But never
mind--let it go.  I reckon it wouldn’t do no good.”

 so he went on a-mumbling up stairs,  n we left.  He was a
mighty nice old man.   always is.

Tom was a good deal bored about what to do for a spoon, but he said
we’d got to have it; so he took a think.  When he had ciphered it out
he told me how we was to do; n we went  waited around 
spoon-basket till we see Aunt Sally coming,  n Tom went to
counting  spoons  laying m out to one side,  I slid one of
m up my sleeve,  Tom says:

“Why, Aunt Sally, re ain’t but nine spoons _yet_.”

She says:

“Go ‘long to your play,  don’t bor me.  I know better, I counted
‘m myself.”

“Well, I’ve counted m twice, Aunty,  I can’t make but nine.”

She looked out of all patience, but of course she come to count--anybody
would.

“I declare to gracious r’ _ain’t_ but nine!” she says.  “Why, what in
 world--plague _take_  things, I’ll count ‘m again.”

So I slipped back  one I had,  when she got done counting, she
says:

“Hang  troublesome rubbage, r’s _ten_ now!”  she looked huffy
 bored both.  But Tom says:

“Why, Aunty, I don’t think re’s ten.”

“You numskull, didn’t you see me _count ‘m?_”

“I know, but--”

“Well, I’ll count ‘m _again_.”

So I smouched one,  y come out nine, same as  or time.
 Well, she _was_ in a tearing way--just a-trembling all over, she was so
mad.  But she counted  counted till she got that addled she’d start
to count in  basket for a spoon sometimes;  so, three times y
come out right,  three times y come out wrong.  n she grabbed
up  basket  slammed it across  house  knocked  cat
galley-west;  she said cle’r out  let her have some peace,  if
we come boring around her again betwixt that  dinner she’d skin
us.  So we had  odd spoon,  dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst
she was a-giving us our sailing orders,  Jim got it all right, along
with her shingle nail, before noon.  We was very well satisfied with
this business,  Tom allowed it was worth twice  trouble it took,
because he said _now_ she couldn’t ever count m spoons twice alike
again to save her life;  wouldn’t believe she’d counted m right if
she _did_;  said that after she’d about counted her head off for 
next three days he judged she’d give it up  offer to kill anybody
that wanted her to ever count m any more.

So we put  sheet back on  line that night,  stole one out of
her closet;  kept on putting it back  stealing it again for a
couple of days till she didn’t know how many sheets she had any more,
 she didn’t _care_,  warn’t a-going to bullyrag  rest of her
soul out about it,  wouldn’t count m again not to save her life;
she drur die first.

So we was all right now, as to  shirt   sheet   spoon
  cles, by  help of  calf   rats   mixed-up
counting;  as to  clestick, it warn’t no consequence, it would
blow over by  by.

But that pie was a job; we had no end of trouble with that pie.  We
fixed it up away down in  woods,  cooked it re;  we got it
done at last,  very satisfactory, too; but not all in one day;  we
had to use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through, 
we got burnt pretty much all over, in places,  eyes put out with
 smoke; because, you see, we didn’t want nothing but a crust,  we
couldn’t prop it up right,  she would always cave in.  But of course
we thought of  right way at last--which was to cook  ladder, too,
in  pie.  So n we laid in with Jim  second night,  tore
up  sheet all in little strings  twisted m toger,  long
before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person
with.  We let on it took nine months to make it.

 in  forenoon we took it down to  woods, but it wouldn’t go
into  pie.  Being made of a whole sheet, that way, re was rope
enough for forty pies if we’d a wanted m,  plenty left over
for soup, or sausage, or anything you choose.  We could a had a whole
dinner.

But we didn’t need it.  All we needed was just enough for  pie, 
so we throwed  rest away.  We didn’t cook none of  pies in 
wash-pan--afraid  solder would melt; but Uncle Silas he had a noble
brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of, because it belonged
to one of his ancesters with a long wooden hle that come over from
Engl with William  Conqueror in  Mayflower or one of m early
ships  was hid away up garret with a lot of or old pots  things
that was valuable, not on account of being any account, because y
warn’t, but on account of m being relicts, you know,  we snaked
her out, private,  took her down re, but she failed on  first
pies, because we didn’t know how, but she come up smiling on  last
one.  We took  lined her with dough,  set her in  coals, 
loaded her up with rag rope,  put on a dough roof,  shut down 
lid,  put hot embers on top,  stood off five foot, with  long
hle, cool  comfortable,  in fifteen minutes she turned out a
pie that was a satisfaction to look at. But  person that et it would
want to fetch a couple of kags of toothpicks along, for if that rope
ladder wouldn’t cramp him down to business I don’t know nothing what I’m
talking about,  lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him till next
time, too.

Nat didn’t look when we put  witch pie in Jim’s pan;  we put 
three tin plates in  bottom of  pan under  vittles;  so Jim
got everything all right,  as soon as he was by himself he busted
into  pie  hid  rope ladder inside of his straw tick,
 scratched some marks on a tin plate  throwed it out of 
window-hole.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

MAKING m pens was a distressid tough job,  so was  saw;  Jim
allowed  inscription was going to be  toughest of all.  That’s 
one which  prisoner has to scrabble on  wall.  But he had to have
it; Tom said he’d _got_ to; re warn’t no case of a state prisoner not
scrabbling his inscription to leave behind,  his coat of arms.

“Look at Lady Jane Grey,” he says; “look at Gilford Dudley; look at old
Northumberl!  Why, Huck, s’pose it _is_ considerble trouble?--what
you going to do?--how you going to get around it?  Jim’s _got_ to do his
inscription  coat of arms.  y all do.”

Jim says:

“Why, Mars Tom, I hain’t got no coat o’ arm; I hain’t got nuffn but dish
yer ole shirt, en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat.”

“Oh, you don’t underst, Jim; a coat of arms is very different.”

“Well,” I says, “Jim’s right, anyway, when he says he ain’t got no coat
of arms, because he hain’t.”

“I reckon I knowed that,” Tom says, “but you bet he’ll have one before
he goes out of this--because he’s going out _right_,  re ain’t
going to be no flaws in his record.”

So whilst me  Jim filed away at  pens on a brickbat apiece, Jim
a-making his’n out of  brass  I making mine out of  spoon,
Tom set to work to think out  coat of arms.  By  by he said he’d
struck so many good ones he didn’t hardly know which to take, but re
was one which he reckoned he’d decide on.  He says:

“On  scutcheon we’ll have a bend _or_ in  dexter base, a saltire
_murrey_ in  fess, with a dog, couchant, for common charge,  under
his foot a chain embattled, for slavery, with a chevron _vert_ in a
chief engrailed,  three invected lines on a field _azure_, with 
nombril points rampant on a dancette indented; crest, a runaway nigger,
_sable_, with his bundle over his shoulder on a bar sinister;  a
couple of gules for supporters, which is you  me; motto, _Maggiore
Fretta, Minore Otto._  Got it out of a book--means  more haste 
less speed.”

“Geewhillikins,” I says, “but what does  rest of it mean?”

“We ain’t got no time to bor over that,” he says; “we got to dig in
like all git-out.”

“Well, anyway,” I says, “what’s _some_ of it?  What’s a fess?”

“A fess--a fess is--_you_ don’t need to know what a fess is.  I’ll show
him how to make it when he gets to it.”

“Shucks, Tom,” I says, “I think you might tell a person.  What’s a bar
sinister?”

“Oh, I don’t know.  But he’s got to have it.  All  nobility does.”

That was just his way.  If it didn’t suit him to explain a thing to you,
he wouldn’t do it.  You might pump at him a week, it wouldn’t make no
difference.

He’d got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he started in to
finish up  rest of that part of  work, which was to plan out a
mournful inscription--said Jim got to have one, like y all done.  He
made up a lot,  wrote m out on a paper,  read m off, so:

1.  Here a captive heart busted. 2.  Here a poor prisoner, forsook by
 world  friends, fretted his sorrowful life. 3.  Here a lonely
heart broke,  a worn spirit went to its rest, after thirty-seven
years of solitary captivity. 4.  Here, homeless  friendless, after
thirty-seven years of bitter captivity, perished a noble stranger,
natural son of Louis XIV.

Tom’s voice trembled whilst he was reading m,  he most broke down.
When he got done he couldn’t no way make up his mind which one for Jim
to scrabble on to  wall, y was all so good; but at last he allowed
he would let him scrabble m all on.  Jim said it would take him a
year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to  logs with a nail,  he
didn’t know how to make letters, besides; but Tom said he would block
m out for him,  n he wouldn’t have nothing to do but just
follow  lines.  n pretty soon he says:

“Come to think,  logs ain’t a-going to do; y don’t have log walls
in a dungeon:  we got to dig  inscriptions into a rock.  We’ll fetch
a rock.”

Jim said  rock was worse than  logs; he said it would take him
such a pison long time to dig m into a rock he wouldn’t ever get out.
 But Tom said he would let me help him do it.  n he took a look to
see how me  Jim was getting along with  pens.  It was most pesky
tedious hard work  slow,  didn’t give my hs no show to get
well of  sores,  we didn’t seem to make no headway, hardly; so Tom
says:

“I know how to fix it.  We got to have a rock for  coat of arms 
mournful inscriptions,  we can kill two birds with that same rock.
re’s a gaudy big grindstone down at  mill,  we’ll smouch it,
 carve  things on it,  file out  pens   saw on it,
too.”

It warn’t no slouch of an idea;  it warn’t no slouch of a grindstone
nur; but we allowed we’d tackle it.  It warn’t quite midnight yet,
so we cleared out for  mill, leaving Jim at work.  We smouched 
grindstone,  set out to roll her home, but it was a most nation tough
job. Sometimes, do what we could, we couldn’t keep her from falling
over,  she come mighty near mashing us every time.  Tom said she was
going to get one of us, sure, before we got through.  We got her half
way;  n we was plumb played out,  most drownded with sweat.  We
see it warn’t no use; we got to go  fetch Jim. So he raised up his
bed  slid  chain off of  bed-leg,  wrapt it round  round
his neck,  we crawled out through our hole  down re,  Jim
 me laid into that grindstone  walked her along like nothing; 
Tom superintended.  He could out-superintend any boy I ever see.  He
knowed how to do everything.

Our hole was pretty big, but it warn’t big enough to get  grindstone
through; but Jim he took  pick  soon made it big enough.  n Tom
marked out m things on it with  nail,  set Jim to work on m,
with  nail for a chisel  an iron bolt from  rubbage in 
lean-to for a hammer,  told him to work till  rest of his cle
quit on him,  n he could go to bed,  hide  grindstone under
his straw tick  sleep on it.  n we helped him fix his chain back
on  bed-leg,  was ready for bed ourselves.  But Tom thought of
something,  says:

“You got any spiders in here, Jim?”

“No, sah, thanks to goodness I hain’t, Mars Tom.”

“All right, we’ll get you some.”

“But bless you, honey, I doan’ _want_ none.  I’s afeard un um.  I jis’
‘s soon have rattlesnakes aroun’.”

Tom thought a minute or two,  says:

“It’s a good idea.   I reckon it’s been done.  It _must_ a been done;
it sts to reason.  Yes, it’s a prime good idea.  Where could you keep
it?”

“Keep what, Mars Tom?”

“Why, a rattlesnake.”

“De goodness gracious alive, Mars Tom!  Why, if dey was a rattlesnake to
come in heah I’d take en bust right out thoo dat log wall, I would, wid
my head.”

“Why, Jim, you wouldn’t be afraid of it after a little.  You could tame
it.”

“_Tame_ it!”

“Yes--easy enough.  Every animal is grateful for kindness  petting,
 y wouldn’t _think_ of hurting a person that pets m.  Any book
will tell you that.  You try--that’s all I ask; just try for two or three
days. Why, you can get him so, in a little while, that he’ll love you;
 sleep with you;  won’t stay away from you a minute;  will let
you wrap him round your neck  put his head in your mouth.”

“_Please_, Mars Tom--_doan_’ talk so!  I can’t _stan_’ it!  He’d _let_
me shove his head in my mouf--fer a favor, hain’t it?  I lay he’d wait a
pow’ful long time ‘fo’ I _ast_ him.  En mo’ en dat, I doan’ _want_ him
to sleep wid me.”

“Jim, don’t act so foolish.  A prisoner’s _got_ to have some kind of a
dumb pet,  if a rattlesnake hain’t ever been tried, why, re’s more
glory to be gained in your being  first to ever try it than any or
way you could ever think of to save your life.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I doan’ _want_ no sich glory.  Snake take ‘n bite
Jim’s chin off, den _whah_ is de glory?  No, sah, I doan’ want no sich
doin’s.”

“Blame it, can’t you _try_?  I only _want_ you to try--you needn’t keep
it up if it don’t work.”

“But de trouble all _done_ ef de snake bite me while I’s a tryin’ him.
Mars Tom, I’s willin’ to tackle mos’ anything ‘at ain’t onreasonable,
but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame, I’s
gwyne to _leave_, dat’s _shore_.”

“Well, n, let it go, let it go, if you’re so bull-headed about it.
 We can get you some garter-snakes,  you can tie some buttons on
ir tails,  let on y’re rattlesnakes,  I reckon that ‘ll have
to do.”

“I k’n stan’ _dem_, Mars Tom, but blame’ ‘f I couldn’ get along widout
um, I tell you dat.  I never knowed b’fo’ ‘t was so much bor 
trouble to be a prisoner.”

“Well, it _always_ is when it’s done right.  You got any rats around
here?”

“No, sah, I hain’t seed none.”

“Well, we’ll get you some rats.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I doan’ _want_ no rats.  Dey’s de dadblamedest creturs
to ‘sturb a body, en rustle roun’ over ‘im, en bite his feet, when he’s
tryin’ to sleep, I ever see.  No, sah, gimme g’yarter-snakes, ‘f I’s
got to have ‘m, but doan’ gimme no rats; I hain’ got no use f’r um,
skasely.”

“But, Jim, you _got_ to have ‘em--y all do.  So don’t make no more
fuss about it.  Prisoners ain’t ever without rats.  re ain’t no
instance of it.   y train m,  pet m,  learn m
tricks,  y get to be as sociable as flies.  But you got to play
music to m.  You got anything to play music on?”

“I ain’ got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o’ paper, en a juice-harp;
but I reck’n dey wouldn’ take no stock in a juice-harp.”

“Yes y would _y_ don’t care what kind of music ‘tis.  A
jews-harp’s plenty good enough for a rat.  All animals like music--in a
prison y dote on it.  Specially, painful music;  you can’t get no
or kind out of a jews-harp.  It always interests m; y come out
to see what’s  matter with you.  Yes, you’re all right; you’re fixed
very well.  You want to set on your bed nights before you go to sleep,
 early in  mornings,  play your jews-harp; play ‘ Last Link
is Broken’--that’s  thing that ‘ll scoop a rat quicker ‘n anything
else;  when you’ve played about two minutes you’ll see all  rats,
  snakes,  spiders,  things begin to feel worried about you,
 come.   y’ll just fairly swarm over you,  have a noble good
time.”

“Yes, _dey_ will, I reck’n, Mars Tom, but what kine er time is _Jim_
havin’? Blest if I kin see de pint.  But I’ll do it ef I got to.  I
reck’n I better keep de animals satisfied, en not have no trouble in de
house.”

Tom waited to think it over,  see if re wasn’t nothing else; 
pretty soon he says:

“Oh, re’s one thing I forgot.  Could you raise a flower here, do you
reckon?”

“I doan know but maybe I could, Mars Tom; but it’s tolable dark in heah,
en I ain’ got no use f’r no flower, nohow, en she’d be a pow’ful sight
o’ trouble.”

“Well, you try it, anyway.  Some or prisoners has done it.”

“One er dem big cat-tail-lookin’ mullen-stalks would grow in heah, Mars
Tom, I reck’n, but she wouldn’t be wuth half de trouble she’d coss.”

“Don’t you believe it.  We’ll fetch you a little one  you plant it in
 corner over re,  raise it.   don’t call it mullen, call it
Pitchiola--that’s its right name when it’s in a prison.   you want to
water it with your tears.”

“Why, I got plenty spring water, Mars Tom.”

“You don’t _want_ spring water; you want to water it with your tears.
 It’s  way y always do.”

“Why, Mars Tom, I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen-stalks twyste wid
spring water whiles anor man’s a _start’n_ one wid tears.”

“That ain’t  idea.  You _got_ to do it with tears.”

“She’ll die on my han’s, Mars Tom, she sholy will; kase I doan’ skasely
ever cry.”

So Tom was stumped.  But he studied it over,  n said Jim would
have to worry along  best he could with an onion.  He promised
he would go to  nigger cabins  drop one, private, in Jim’s
coffee-pot, in  morning. Jim said he would “jis’ ‘s soon have
tobacker in his coffee;”  found so much fault with it,  with 
work  bor of raising  mullen,  jews-harping  rats, 
petting  flattering up  snakes  spiders  things, on top of
all  or work he had to do on pens,  inscriptions,  journals,
 things, which made it more trouble  worry  responsibility to
be a prisoner than anything he ever undertook, that Tom most lost all
patience with him;  said he was just loadened down with more gaudier
chances than a prisoner ever had in  world to make a name for
himself,  yet he didn’t know enough to appreciate m,  y was
just about wasted on him.  So Jim he was sorry,  said he wouldn’t
behave so no more,  n me  Tom shoved for bed.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

IN  morning we went up to  village  bought a wire rat-trap 
fetched it down,  unstopped  best rat-hole,  in about an hour
we had fifteen of  bulliest kind of ones;  n we took it  put
it in a safe place under Aunt Sally’s bed.  But while we was gone for
spiders little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Elexer Phelps found
it re,  opened  door of it to see if  rats would come out,
 y did;  Aunt Sally she come in,  when we got back she was
a-sting on top of  bed raising Cain,   rats was doing what
y could to keep off  dull times for her.  So she took  dusted
us both with  hickry,  we was as much as two hours catching
anor fifteen or sixteen, drat that meddlesome cub,  y warn’t
 likeliest, nur, because  first haul was  pick of  flock.
 I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was.

We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders,  bugs,  frogs, 
caterpillars,  one thing or anor;  we like to got a hornet’s
nest, but we didn’t.   family was at home.  We didn’t give it right
up, but stayed with m as long as we could; because we allowed we’d
tire m out or y’d got to tire us out,  y done it.  n we
got allycumpain  rubbed on  places,  was pretty near all right
again, but couldn’t set down convenient.   so we went for  snakes,
 grabbed a couple of dozen garters  house-snakes,  put m in
a bag,  put it in our room,  by that time it was supper-time, 
a rattling good honest day’s work:   hungry?--oh, no, I reckon not!
  re warn’t a blessed snake up re when we went back--we didn’t
half tie  sack,  y worked out somehow,  left.  But it didn’t
matter much, because y was still on  premises somewheres.  So
we judged we could get some of m again.  No, re warn’t no real
scarcity of snakes about  house for a considerable spell.  You’d see
m dripping from  rafters  places every now  n;  y
generly led in your plate, or down  back of your neck,  most
of  time where you didn’t want m.  Well, y was hsome 
striped,  re warn’t no harm in a million of m; but that never
made no difference to Aunt Sally; she despised snakes, be  breed what
y might,  she couldn’t st m no way you could fix it; 
every time one of m flopped down on her, it didn’t make no difference
what she was doing, she would just lay that work down  light out.  I
never see such a woman.   you could hear her whoop to Jericho.  You
couldn’t get her to take a-holt of one of m with  tongs.   if
she turned over  found one in bed she would scramble out  lift a
howl that you would think  house was afire.  She disturbed  old
man so that he said he could most wish re hadn’t ever been no snakes
created.  Why, after every last snake had been gone clear out of 
house for as much as a week Aunt Sally warn’t over it yet; she warn’t
near over it; when she was setting thinking about something you could
touch her on  back of her neck with a fear  she would jump
right out of her stockings.  It was very curious.  But Tom said all
women was just so.  He said y was made that way for some reason or
or.

We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her way,  she
allowed se lickings warn’t nothing to what she would do if we ever
loaded up  place again with m.  I didn’t mind  lickings,
because y didn’t amount to nothing; but I minded  trouble we
had to lay in anor lot.  But we got m laid in,  all  or
things;  you never see a cabin as blisome as Jim’s was when y’d
all swarm out for music  go for him.  Jim didn’t like  spiders,
  spiders didn’t like Jim;  so y’d lay for him,  make it
mighty warm for him.   he said that between  rats   snakes
  grindstone re warn’t no room in bed for him, skasely; 
when re was, a body couldn’t sleep, it was so lively,  it was
always lively, he said, because _y_ never all slept at one time, but
took turn about, so when  snakes was asleep  rats was on deck, 
when  rats turned in  snakes come on watch, so he always had one
gang under him, in his way,  t’or gang having a circus over him,
 if he got up to hunt a new place  spiders would take a chance at
him as he crossed over. He said if he ever got out this time he wouldn’t
ever be a prisoner again, not for a salary.

Well, by  end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape.
  shirt was sent in early, in a pie,  every time a rat bit Jim he
would get up  write a little in his journal whilst  ink was fresh;
 pens was made,  inscriptions  so on was all carved on 
grindstone;  bed-leg was sawed in two,  we had et up  sawdust,
 it give us a most amazing stomach-ache.  We reckoned we was all
going to die, but didn’t.  It was  most undigestible sawdust I ever
see;  Tom said  same.

But as I was saying, we’d got all  work done now, at last;  we was
all pretty much fagged out, too, but mainly Jim.   old man had wrote
a couple of times to  plantation below Orleans to come  get ir
runaway nigger, but hadn’t got no answer, because re warn’t no such
plantation; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in  St. Louis 
New Orleans papers;  when he mentioned  St. Louis ones it give me
 cold shivers,  I see we hadn’t no time to lose. So Tom said, now
for  nonnamous letters.

“What’s m?”  I says.

“Warnings to  people that something is up.  Sometimes it’s done one
way, sometimes anor.  But re’s always somebody spying around that
gives notice to  governor of  castle.  When Louis XVI. was going
to light out of  Tooleries, a servant-girl done it.  It’s a very good
way,  so is  nonnamous letters.  We’ll use m both.   it’s
usual for  prisoner’s mor to change clos with him,  she
stays in,  he slides out in her clos.  We’ll do that, too.”

“But looky here, Tom, what do we want to _warn_ anybody for that
something’s up?  Let m find it out for mselves--it’s ir
lookout.”

“Yes, I know; but you can’t depend on m.  It’s  way y’ve acted
from  very start--left us to do _everything_.  y’re so confiding
 mullet-headed y don’t take notice of nothing at all.  So if we
don’t _give_ m notice re won’t be nobody nor nothing to interfere
with us,  so after all our hard work  trouble this escape ‘ll go
off perfectly flat; won’t amount to nothing--won’t be nothing _to_ it.”

“Well, as for me, Tom, that’s  way I’d like.”

“Shucks!” he says,  looked disgusted.  So I says:

“But I ain’t going to make no complaint.  Any way that suits you suits
me. What you going to do about  servant-girl?”

“You’ll be her.  You slide in, in  middle of  night,  hook that
yaller girl’s frock.”

“Why, Tom, that ‘ll make trouble next morning; because, of course, she
prob’bly hain’t got any but that one.”

“I know; but you don’t want it but fifteen minutes, to carry 
nonnamous letter  shove it under  front door.”

“All right, n, I’ll do it; but I could carry it just as hy in my
own togs.”

“You wouldn’t look like a servant-girl _n_, would you?”

“No, but re won’t be nobody to see what I look like, _anyway_.”

“That ain’t got nothing to do with it.   thing for us to do is just
to do our _duty_,  not worry about wher anybody _sees_ us do it or
not. Hain’t you got no principle at all?”

“All right, I ain’t saying nothing; I’m  servant-girl.  Who’s Jim’s
mor?”

“I’m his mor.  I’ll hook a gown from Aunt Sally.”

“Well, n, you’ll have to stay in  cabin when me  Jim leaves.”

“Not much.  I’ll stuff Jim’s clos full of straw  lay it on his bed
to represent his mor in disguise,  Jim ‘ll take  nigger woman’s
gown off of me  wear it,  we’ll all evade toger.  When a
prisoner of style escapes it’s called an evasion.  It’s always called
so when a king escapes, f’rinstance.    same with a king’s son;
it don’t make no difference wher he’s a natural one or an unnatural
one.”

So Tom he wrote  nonnamous letter,  I smouched  yaller wench’s
frock that night,  put it on,  shoved it under  front door, 
way Tom told me to.  It said:

Beware.  Trouble is brewing.  Keep a sharp lookout. _Unknown_ _Friend_.

Next night we stuck a picture, which Tom drawed in blood, of a skull 
crossbones on  front door;  next night anor one of a coffin on
 back door.  I never see a family in such a sweat.  y couldn’t a
been worse scared if  place had a been full of ghosts laying for m
behind everything  under  beds  shivering through  air.  If
a door banged, Aunt Sally she jumped  said “ouch!” if anything fell,
she jumped  said “ouch!” if you happened to touch her, when she
warn’t noticing, she done  same; she couldn’t face noway  be
satisfied, because she allowed re was something behind her every
time--so she was always a-whirling around sudden,  saying “ouch,” 
before she’d got two-thirds around she’d whirl back again,  say it
again;  she was afraid to go to bed, but she dasn’t set up.  So 
thing was working very well, Tom said; he said he never see a thing work
more satisfactory. He said it showed it was done right.

So he said, now for  gr bulge!  So  very next morning at 
streak of dawn we got anor letter ready,  was wondering what we
better do with it, because we heard m say at supper y was going
to have a nigger on watch at both doors all night.  Tom he went down 
lightning-rod to spy around;   nigger at  back door was asleep,
 he stuck it in  back of his neck  come back.  This letter
said:

Don’t betray me, I wish to be your friend.  re is a desprate gang of
cutthroats from over in  Indian Territory going to steal your runaway
nigger to-night,  y have been trying to scare you so as you will
stay in  house  not bor m.  I am one of  gang, but have
got religgion  wish to quit it  lead an honest life again, 
will betray  helish design. y will sneak down from northards,
along  fence, at midnight exact, with a false key,  go in 
nigger’s cabin to get him. I am to be off a piece  blow a tin horn
if I see any danger; but stead of that I will _baa_ like a sheep soon as
y get in  not blow at all; n whilst y are getting his
chains loose, you slip re  lock m in,  can kill m at your
leasure.  Don’t do anything but just  way I am telling you, if you do
y will suspicion something  raise whoop-jamboreehoo. I do not wish
any reward but to know I have done  right thing. _Unknown Friend._




CHAPTER XL.

WE was feeling pretty good after breakfast,  took my canoe  went
over  river a-fishing, with a lunch,  had a good time,  took a
look at  raft  found her all right,  got home late to supper,
 found m in such a sweat  worry y didn’t know which end y
was sting on,  made us go right off to bed  minute we was done
supper,  wouldn’t tell us what  trouble was,  never let on a
word about  new letter, but didn’t need to, because we knowed as much
about it as anybody did,  as soon as we was half up stairs  her
back was turned we slid for  cellar cupboard  loaded up a good
lunch  took it up to our room  went to bed,  got up about
half-past eleven,  Tom put on Aunt Sally’s dress that he stole 
was going to start with  lunch, but says:

“Where’s  butter?”

“I laid out a hunk of it,” I says, “on a piece of a corn-pone.”

“Well, you _left_ it laid out, n--it ain’t here.”

“We can get along without it,” I says.

“We can get along _with_ it, too,” he says; “just you slide down cellar
 fetch it.   n mosey right down  lightning-rod  come
along. I’ll go  stuff  straw into Jim’s clos to represent his
mor in disguise,  be ready to _baa_ like a sheep  shove soon as
you get re.”

So out he went,  down cellar went I.  hunk of butter, big as
a person’s fist, was where I had left it, so I took up  slab of
corn-pone with it on,  blowed out my light,  started up stairs
very stealthy,  got up to  main floor all right, but here comes
Aunt Sally with a cle,  I clapped  truck in my hat,  clapped
my hat on my head,   next second she see me;  she says:

“You been down cellar?”

“Yes’m.”

“What you been doing down re?”

“Noth’n.”

“_Noth’n!_”

“No’m.”

“Well, n, what possessed you to go down re this time of night?”

“I don’t know ‘m.”

“You don’t _know_?  Don’t answer me that way. Tom, I want to know what
you been _doing_ down re.”

“I hain’t been doing a single thing, Aunt Sally, I hope to gracious if I
have.”

I reckoned she’d let me go now,  as a generl thing she would; but I
s’pose re was so many strange things going on she was just in a sweat
about every little thing that warn’t yard-stick straight; so she says,
very decided:

“You just march into that setting-room  stay re till I come.  You
been up to something you no business to,  I lay I’ll find out what it
is before I’M done with you.”

So she went away as I opened  door  walked into  setting-room.
My, but re was a crowd re!  Fifteen farmers,  every one of m
had a gun.  I was most powerful sick,  slunk to a chair  set down.
y was setting around, some of m talking a little, in a low voice,
 all of m fidgety  uneasy, but trying to look like y warn’t;
but I knowed y was, because y was always taking off ir hats,
 putting m on,  scratching ir heads,  changing ir
seats,  fumbling with ir buttons.  I warn’t easy myself, but I
didn’t take my hat off, all  same.

I did wish Aunt Sally would come,  get done with me,  lick me, if
she wanted to,  let me get away  tell Tom how we’d overdone this
thing,  what a thundering hornet’s-nest we’d got ourselves into, so
we could stop fooling around straight off,  clear out with Jim before
se rips got out of patience  come for us.

At last she come  begun to ask me questions, but I _couldn’t_ answer
m straight, I didn’t know which end of me was up; because se men
was in such a fidget now that some was wanting to start right NOW 
lay for m desperadoes,  saying it warn’t but a few minutes to
midnight;  ors was trying to get m to hold on  wait for 
sheep-signal;  here was Aunty pegging away at  questions, 
me a-shaking all over  ready to sink down in my tracks I was
that scared;   place getting hotter  hotter,   butter
beginning to melt  run down my neck  behind my ears;  pretty
soon, when one of m says, “I’M for going  getting in  cabin
_first_  right _now_,  catching m when y come,” I most
dropped;  a streak of butter come a-trickling down my forehead, 
Aunt Sally she see it,  turns white as a sheet,  says:

“For  l’s sake, what _is_  matter with  child?  He’s got 
brain-fever as shore as you’re born,  y’re oozing out!”

 everybody runs to see,  she snatches off my hat,  out comes
 bread  what was left of  butter,  she grabbed me, 
hugged me,  says:

“Oh, what a turn you did give me!  how glad  grateful I am it
ain’t no worse; for luck’s against us,  it never rains but it pours,
 when I see that truck I thought we’d lost you, for I knowed by
 color  all it was just like your brains would be if--Dear,
dear, whyd’nt you _tell_ me that was what you’d been down re for, I
wouldn’t a cared.  Now cler out to bed,  don’t lemme see no more of
you till morning!”

I was up stairs in a second,  down  lightning-rod in anor one,
 shinning through  dark for  lean-to.  I couldn’t hardly get my
words out, I was so anxious; but I told Tom as quick as I could we must
jump for it now,  not a minute to lose-- house full of men, yonder,
with guns!

His eyes just blazed;  he says:

“No!--is that so?  _ain’t_ it bully!  Why, Huck, if it was to do over
again, I bet I could fetch two hundred!  If we could put it off till--”

“Hurry!  _Hurry_!”  I says.  “Where’s Jim?”

“Right at your elbow; if you reach out your arm you can touch him.
 He’s dressed,  everything’s ready.  Now we’ll slide out  give 
sheep-signal.”

But n we heard  tramp of men coming to  door,  heard m
begin to fumble with  pad-lock,  heard a man say:

“I _told_ you we’d be too soon; y haven’t come-- door is locked.
Here, I’ll lock some of you into  cabin,  you lay for ‘em in 
dark  kill ‘em when y come;   rest scatter around a piece,
 listen if you can hear ‘em coming.”

So in y come, but couldn’t see us in  dark,  most trod on
us whilst we was hustling to get under  bed.  But we got under all
right,  out through  hole, swift but soft--Jim first, me next,
 Tom last, which was according to Tom’s orders.  Now we was in 
lean-to,  heard trampings close by outside.  So we crept to  door,
 Tom stopped us re  put his eye to  crack, but couldn’t make
out nothing, it was so dark;  whispered  said he would listen
for  steps to get furr,  when he nudged us Jim must glide out
first,  him last.  So he set his ear to  crack  listened, 
listened,  listened,   steps a-scraping around out re all
 time;  at last he nudged us,  we slid out,  stooped down,
not breathing,  not making  least noise,  slipped stealthy
towards  fence in Injun file,  got to it all right,  me  Jim
over it; but Tom’s britches catched fast on a splinter on  top
rail,  n he hear  steps coming, so he had to pull loose, which
snapped  splinter  made a noise;  as he dropped in our tracks
 started somebody sings out:

“Who’s that?  Answer, or I’ll shoot!”

But we didn’t answer; we just unfurled our heels  shoved.  n re
was a rush,  a _Bang, Bang, Bang!_   bullets fairly whizzed
around us! We heard m sing out:

“Here y are!  y’ve broke for  river!  After ‘em, boys,  turn
loose  dogs!”

So here y come, full tilt.  We could hear m because y wore
boots  yelled, but we didn’t wear no boots  didn’t yell.  We was
in  path to  mill;  when y got pretty close on to us we
dodged into  bush  let m go by,  n dropped in behind
m.  y’d had all  dogs shut up, so y wouldn’t scare off 
robbers; but by this time somebody had let m loose,  here y
come, making powwow enough for a million; but y was our dogs; so we
stopped in our tracks till y catched up;  when y see it warn’t
nobody but us,  no excitement to offer m, y only just said
howdy,  tore right ahead towards  shouting  clattering; 
n we up-steam again,  whizzed along after m till we was nearly
to  mill,  n struck up through  bush to where my canoe was
tied,  hopped in  pulled for dear life towards  middle of 
river, but didn’t make no more noise than we was obleeged to. n we
struck out, easy  comfortable, for  isl where my raft was; 
we could hear m yelling  barking at each or all up  down 
bank, till we was so far away  sounds got dim  died out.   when
we stepped on to  raft I says:

“_Now_, old Jim, you’re a free man again,  I bet you won’t ever be a
slave no more.”

“En a mighty good job it wuz, too, Huck.  It ‘uz planned beautiful, en
it ‘uz done beautiful; en dey ain’t _nobody_ kin git up a plan dat’s mo’
mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz.”

We was all glad as we could be, but Tom was  gladdest of all because
he had a bullet in  calf of his leg.

When me  Jim heard that we didn’t feel so brash as what we did
before. It was hurting him considerable,  bleeding; so we laid him in
 wigwam  tore up one of  duke’s shirts for to bage him, but
he says:

“Gimme  rags; I can do it myself.  Don’t stop now; don’t fool around
here,   evasion booming along so hsome; man  sweeps,  set
her loose!  Boys, we done it elegant!--‘deed we did.  I wish _we’d_ a
had  hling of Louis XVI., re wouldn’t a been no ‘Son of Saint
Louis, ascend to heaven!’ wrote down in _his_ biography; no, sir, we’d
a whooped him over  _border_--that’s what we’d a done with _him_--
done it just as slick as nothing at all, too.  Man  sweeps--man 
sweeps!”

But me  Jim was consulting-- thinking.   after we’d thought a
minute, I says:

“Say it, Jim.”

So he says:

“Well, den, dis is de way it look to me, Huck.  Ef it wuz _him_ dat ‘uz
bein’ sot free, en one er de boys wuz to git shot, would he say, ‘Go on
en save me, nemmine ‘bout a doctor f’r to save dis one?’  Is dat like
Mars Tom Sawyer?  Would he say dat?  You _bet_ he wouldn’t!  _well_,
den, is _Jim_ gywne to say it?  No, sah--I doan’ budge a step out’n dis
place ‘dout a _doctor_, not if it’s forty year!”

I knowed he was white inside,  I reckoned he’d say what he did say--so
it was all right now,  I told Tom I was a-going for a doctor.
 He raised considerable row about it, but me  Jim stuck to it 
wouldn’t budge; so he was for crawling out  setting  raft loose
himself; but we wouldn’t let him.  n he give us a piece of his mind,
but it didn’t do no good.

So when he sees me getting  canoe ready, he says:

“Well, n, if you’re bound to go, I’ll tell you  way to do when you
get to  village.  Shut  door  blindfold  doctor tight 
fast,  make him swear to be silent as  grave,  put a purse
full of gold in his h,  n take  lead him all around 
back alleys  everywheres in  dark,  n fetch him here in 
canoe, in a roundabout way amongst  isls,  search him  take
his chalk away from him,  don’t give it back to him till you get him
back to  village, or else he will chalk this raft so he can find it
again. It’s  way y all do.”

So I said I would,  left,  Jim was to hide in  woods when he
see  doctor coming till he was gone again.




CHAPTER XLI.

 doctor was an old man; a very nice, kind-looking old man when I got
him up.  I told him me  my bror was over on Spanish Isl hunting
yesterday afternoon,  camped on a piece of a raft we found,  about
midnight he must a kicked his gun in his dreams, for it went off 
shot him in  leg,  we wanted him to go over re  fix it 
not say nothing about it, nor let anybody know, because we wanted to
come home this evening  surprise  folks.

“Who is your folks?” he says.

“ Phelpses, down yonder.”

“Oh,” he says.   after a minute, he says:

“How’d you say he got shot?”

“He had a dream,” I says, “ it shot him.”

“Singular dream,” he says.

So he lit up his lantern,  got his saddle-bags,  we started.  But
when he sees  canoe he didn’t like  look of her--said she was big
enough for one, but didn’t look pretty safe for two.  I says:

“Oh, you needn’t be afeard, sir, she carried  three of us easy
enough.”

“What three?”

“Why, me  Sid, ---- _ guns_; that’s what I mean.”

“Oh,” he says.

But he put his foot on  gunnel  rocked her,  shook his head,
 said he reckoned he’d look around for a bigger one.  But y was
all locked  chained; so he took my canoe,  said for me to wait
till he come back, or I could hunt around furr, or maybe I better
go down home  get m ready for  surprise if I wanted to.  But
I said I didn’t; so I told him just how to find  raft,  n he
started.

I struck an idea pretty soon.  I says to myself, spos’n he can’t fix
that leg just in three shakes of a sheep’s tail, as  saying is?
spos’n it takes him three or four days?  What are we going to do?--lay
around re till he lets  cat out of  bag?  No, sir; I know what
_I’ll_ do.  I’ll wait,  when he comes back if he says he’s got to
go any more I’ll get down re, too, if I swim;  we’ll take  tie
him,  keep him,  shove out down  river;  when Tom’s done
with him we’ll give him what it’s worth, or all we got,  n let him
get ashore.

So n I crept into a lumber-pile to get some sleep;  next time I
waked up  sun was away up over my head!  I shot out  went for 
doctor’s house, but y told me he’d gone away in  night some time
or or,  warn’t back yet.  Well, thinks I, that looks powerful bad
for Tom,  I’ll dig out for  isl right off.  So away I shoved,
 turned  corner,  nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas’s
stomach! He says:

“Why, _Tom!_  Where you been all this time, you rascal?”

“I hain’t been nowheres,” I says, “only just hunting for  runaway
nigger--me  Sid.”

“Why, where ever did you go?” he says.  “Your aunt’s been mighty
uneasy.”

“She needn’t,” I says, “because we was all right.  We followed  men
  dogs, but y outrun us,  we lost m; but we thought we
heard m on  water, so we got a canoe  took out after m 
crossed over, but couldn’t find nothing of m; so we cruised along
up-shore till we got kind of tired  beat out;  tied up  canoe
 went to sleep,  never waked up till about an hour ago; n we
paddled over here to hear  news,  Sid’s at  post-office to see
what he can hear,  I’m a-branching out to get something to eat for
us,  n we’re going home.”

So n we went to  post-office to get “Sid”; but just as I
suspicioned, he warn’t re; so  old man he got a letter out of 
office,  we waited awhile longer, but Sid didn’t come; so  old man
said, come along, let Sid foot it home, or canoe it, when he got done
fooling around--but we would ride.  I couldn’t get him to let me stay
 wait for Sid;  he said re warn’t no use in it,  I must come
along,  let Aunt Sally see we was all right.

When we got home Aunt Sally was that glad to see me she laughed 
cried both,  hugged me,  give me one of m lickings of hern that
don’t amount to shucks,  said she’d serve Sid  same when he come.

  place was plum full of farmers  farmers’ wives, to dinner;
 such anor clack a body never heard.  Old Mrs. Hotchkiss was 
worst; her tongue was a-going all  time.  She says:

“Well, Sister Phelps, I’ve ransacked that-air cabin over, an’ I b’lieve
 nigger was crazy.  I says to Sister Damrell--didn’t I, Sister
Damrell?--s’I, he’s crazy, s’I--m’s  very words I said.  You all
hearn me: he’s crazy, s’I; everything shows it, s’I.  Look at that-air
grindstone, s’I; want to tell _me_’t any cretur ‘t’s in his right mind
‘s a goin’ to scrabble all m crazy things onto a grindstone, s’I?
 Here sich ‘n’ sich a person busted his heart; ‘n’ here so ‘n’ so
pegged along for thirty-seven year, ‘n’ all that--natcherl son o’ Louis
somebody, ‘n’ sich everlast’n rubbage.  He’s plumb crazy, s’I; it’s what
I says in  fust place, it’s what I says in  middle, ‘n’ it’s what
I says last ‘n’ all  time-- nigger’s crazy--crazy ‘s Nebokoodneezer,
s’I.”

“An’ look at that-air ladder made out’n rags, Sister Hotchkiss,” says
old Mrs. Damrell; “what in  name o’ goodness _could_ he ever want
of--”

“ very words I was a-sayin’ no longer ago th’n this minute to Sister
Utterback, ‘n’ she’ll tell you so herself.  Sh-she, look at that-air rag
ladder, sh-she; ‘n’ s’I, yes, _look_ at it, s’I--what _could_ he a-wanted
of it, s’I.  Sh-she, Sister Hotchkiss, sh-she--”

“But how in  nation’d y ever _git_ that grindstone _in_ re,
_anyway_? ‘n’ who dug that-air _hole_? ‘n’ who--”

“My very _words_, Brer Penrod!  I was a-sayin’--pass that-air sasser o’
m’lasses, won’t ye?--I was a-sayin’ to Sister Dunlap, jist this minute,
how _did_ y git that grindstone in re, s’I.  Without _help_, mind
you--‘thout _help_!  _that’s_ wher ‘tis.  Don’t tell _me_, s’I; re
_wuz_ help, s’I; ‘n’ r’ wuz a _plenty_ help, too, s’I; r’s ben a
_dozen_ a-helpin’ that nigger, ‘n’ I lay I’d skin every last nigger on
this place but _I’d_ find out who done it, s’I; ‘n’ moreover, s’I--”

“A _dozen_ says you!--_forty_ couldn’t a done every thing that’s been
done. Look at m case-knife saws  things, how tedious y’ve been
made; look at that bed-leg sawed off with ‘m, a week’s work for six men;
look at that nigger made out’n straw on  bed;  look at--”

“You may _well_ say it, Brer Hightower!  It’s jist as I was a-sayin’
to Brer Phelps, his own self.  S’e, what do _you_ think of it, Sister
Hotchkiss, s’e? Think o’ what, Brer Phelps, s’I?  Think o’ that bed-leg
sawed off that a way, s’e?  _think_ of it, s’I?  I lay it never sawed
_itself_ off, s’I--somebody _sawed_ it, s’I; that’s my opinion, take it
or leave it, it mayn’t be no ‘count, s’I, but sich as ‘t is, it’s my
opinion, s’I, ‘n’ if any body k’n start a better one, s’I, let him _do_
it, s’I, that’s all.  I says to Sister Dunlap, s’I--”

“Why, dog my cats, y must a ben a house-full o’ niggers in re
every night for four weeks to a done all that work, Sister Phelps.  Look
at that shirt--every last inch of it kivered over with secret African
writ’n done with blood!  Must a ben a raft uv ‘m at it right along, all
 time, amost.  Why, I’d give two dollars to have it read to me; ‘n’
as for  niggers that wrote it, I ‘low I’d take ‘n’ lash ‘m t’ll--”

“People to _help_ him, Bror Marples!  Well, I reckon you’d _think_
so if you’d a been in this house for a while back.  Why, y’ve stole
everything y could lay ir hs on-- we a-watching all  time,
mind you. y stole that shirt right off o’  line!  as for that
sheet y made  rag ladder out of, r’ ain’t no telling how
many times y _didn’t_ steal that;  flour,  cles, 
clesticks,  spoons,   old warming-pan,  most a thous
things that I disremember now,  my new calico dress;  me 
Silas  my Sid  Tom on  constant watch day __ night, as I was
a-telling you,  not a one of us could catch hide nor hair nor sight
nor sound of m;  here at  last minute, lo  behold you, y
slides right in under our noses  fools us,  not only fools _us_
but  Injun Territory robbers too,  actuly gets _away_ with that
nigger safe  sound,  that with sixteen men  twenty-two dogs
right on ir very heels at that very time!  I tell you, it just bangs
anything I ever _heard_ of. Why, _sperits_ couldn’t a done better 
been no smarter.  I reckon y must a _been_ sperits--because, _you_
know our dogs,  r’ ain’t no better; well, m dogs never even got
on  _track_ of ‘m once!  You explain _that_ to me if you can!--_any_
of you!”

“Well, it does beat--”

“Laws alive, I never--”

“So help me, I wouldn’t a be--”

“_House_-thieves as well as--”

“Goodnessgracioussakes, I’d a ben afeard to live in sich a--”

“‘Fraid to _live_!--why, I was that scared I dasn’t hardly go to bed, or
get up, or lay down, or _set_ down, Sister Ridgeway.  Why, y’d steal
 very--why, goodness sakes, you can guess what kind of a fluster I was
in by  time midnight come last night.  I hope to gracious if I warn’t
afraid y’d steal some o’  family!  I was just to that pass I
didn’t have no reasoning faculties no more.  It looks foolish enough
_now_, in  daytime; but I says to myself, re’s my two poor boys
asleep, ‘way up stairs in that lonesome room,  I declare to goodness
I was that uneasy ‘t I crep’ up re  locked ‘em in!  I _did_.  
anybody would. Because, you know, when you get scared that way,  it
keeps running on,  getting worse  worse all  time,  your
wits gets to addling,  you get to doing all sorts o’ wild things,
 by  by you think to yourself, spos’n I was a boy,  was away up
re,   door ain’t locked,  you--” She stopped, looking kind
of wondering,  n she turned her head around slow,  when her eye
lit on me--I got up  took a walk.

Says I to myself, I can explain better how we come to not be in that
room this morning if I go out to one side  study over it a little.
 So I done it.  But I dasn’t go fur, or she’d a sent for me.   when
it was late in  day  people all went,  n I come in 
told her  noise  shooting waked up me  “Sid,”   door was
locked,  we wanted to see  fun, so we went down  lightning-rod,
 both of us got hurt a little,  we didn’t never want to try _that_
no more.   n I went on  told her all what I told Uncle Silas
before;  n she said she’d forgive us,  maybe it was all right
enough anyway,  about what a body might expect of boys, for all boys
was a pretty harum-scarum lot as fur as she could see;  so, as long
as no harm hadn’t come of it, she judged she better put in her time
being grateful we was alive  well  she had us still, stead of
fretting over what was past  done.  So n she kissed me,  patted
me on  head,  dropped into a kind of a brown study;  pretty
soon jumps up,  says:

“Why, lawsamercy, it’s most night,  Sid not come yet!  What _has_
become of that boy?”

I see my chance; so I skips up  says:

“I’ll run right up to town  get him,” I says.

“No you won’t,” she says.  “You’ll stay right wher’ you are; _one’s_
enough to be lost at a time.  If he ain’t here to supper, your uncle ‘ll
go.”

Well, he warn’t re to supper; so right after supper uncle went.

He come back about ten a little bit uneasy; hadn’t run across Tom’s
track. Aunt Sally was a good _deal_ uneasy; but Uncle Silas he said
re warn’t no occasion to be--boys will be boys, he said,  you’ll
see this one turn up in  morning all sound  right.  So she had
to be satisfied.  But she said she’d set up for him a while anyway, 
keep a light burning so he could see it.

 n when I went up to bed she come up with me  fetched her
cle,  tucked me in,  mored me so good I felt mean,  like
I couldn’t look her in  face;  she set down on  bed  talked
with me a long time,  said what a splendid boy Sid was,  didn’t
seem to want to ever stop talking about him;  kept asking me every
now  n if I reckoned he could a got lost, or hurt, or maybe
drownded,  might be laying at this minute somewheres suffering or
dead,  she not by him to help him,  so  tears would drip down
silent,  I would tell her that Sid was all right,  would be home
in  morning, sure;  she would squeeze my h, or maybe kiss me,
 tell me to say it again,  keep on saying it, because it done her
good,  she was in so much trouble.   when she was going away she
looked down in my eyes so steady  gentle,  says:

“ door ain’t going to be locked, Tom,  re’s  window 
 rod; but you’ll be good, _won’t_ you?   you won’t go?  For _my_
sake.”

Laws knows I _wanted_ to go bad enough to see about Tom,  was all
intending to go; but after that I wouldn’t a went, not for kingdoms.

But she was on my mind  Tom was on my mind, so I slept very restless.
 twice I went down  rod away in  night,  slipped around
front,  see her setting re by her cle in  window with her
eyes towards  road   tears in m;  I wished I could do
something for her, but I couldn’t, only to swear that I wouldn’t never
do nothing to grieve her any more.    third time I waked up at
dawn,  slid down,  she was re yet,  her cle was most out,
 her old gray head was resting on her h,  she was asleep.




CHAPTER XLII.

 old man was uptown again before breakfast, but couldn’t get no
track of Tom;  both of m set at  table thinking,  not saying
nothing,  looking mournful,  ir coffee getting cold,  not
eating anything.  by  by  old man says:

“Did I give you  letter?”

“What letter?”

“ one I got yesterday out of  post-office.”

“No, you didn’t give me no letter.”

“Well, I must a forgot it.”

So he rummaged his pockets,  n went off somewheres where he had
laid it down,  fetched it,  give it to her.  She says:

“Why, it’s from St. Petersburg--it’s from Sis.”

I allowed anor walk would do me good; but I couldn’t stir.  But
before she could break it open she dropped it  run--for she see
something.  so did I. It was Tom Sawyer on a mattress;  that old
doctor;  Jim, in _her_ calico dress, with his hs tied behind him;
 a lot of people.  I hid  letter behind  first thing that come
hy,  rushed.  She flung herself at Tom, crying,  says:

“Oh, he’s dead, he’s dead, I know he’s dead!”

 Tom he turned his head a little,  muttered something or or,
which showed he warn’t in his right mind; n she flung up her hs,
 says:

“He’s alive, thank God!   that’s enough!”  she snatched a kiss of
him,  flew for  house to get  bed ready,  scattering orders
right  left at  niggers  everybody else, as fast as her tongue
could go, every jump of  way.

I followed  men to see what y was going to do with Jim;  
old doctor  Uncle Silas followed after Tom into  house.   men
was very huffy,  some of m wanted to hang Jim for an example to
all  or niggers around re, so y wouldn’t be trying to run
away like Jim done,  making such a raft of trouble,  keeping a
whole family scared most to death for days  nights.  But  ors
said, don’t do it, it wouldn’t answer at all; he ain’t our nigger, 
his owner would turn up  make us pay for him, sure.  So that cooled
m down a little, because  people that’s always  most anxious
for to hang a nigger that hain’t done just right is always  very
ones that ain’t  most anxious to pay for him when y’ve got ir
satisfaction out of him.

y cussed Jim considerble, though,  give him a cuff or two side 
head once in a while, but Jim never said nothing,  he never let on to
know me,  y took him to  same cabin,  put his own clos
on him,  chained him again,  not to no bed-leg this time, but to
a big staple drove into  bottom log,  chained his hs, too, 
both legs,  said he warn’t to have nothing but bread  water to
eat after this till his owner come, or he was sold at auction because
he didn’t come in a certain length of time,  filled up our hole, 
said a couple of farmers with guns must st watch around about 
cabin every night,  a bulldog tied to  door in  daytime; 
about this time y was through with  job  was tapering off with
a kind of generl good-bye cussing,  n  old doctor comes 
takes a look,  says:

“Don’t be no rougher on him than you’re obleeged to, because he ain’t
a bad nigger.  When I got to where I found  boy I see I couldn’t cut
 bullet out without some help,  he warn’t in no condition for
me to leave to go  get help;  he got a little worse  a little
worse,  after a long time he went out of his head,  wouldn’t let
me come a-nigh him any more,  said if I chalked his raft he’d kill
me,  no end of wild foolishness like that,  I see I couldn’t do
anything at all with him; so I says, I got to have _help_ somehow; 
 minute I says it out crawls this nigger from somewheres  says
he’ll help,  he done it, too,  done it very well.  Of course I
judged he must be a runaway nigger,  re I _was_!  re I had
to stick right straight along all  rest of  day  all night.  It
was a fix, I tell you! I had a couple of patients with  chills, 
of course I’d of liked to run up to town  see m, but I dasn’t,
because  nigger might get away,  n I’d be to blame;  yet
never a skiff come close enough for me to hail.  So re I had to stick
plumb until daylight this morning;  I never see a nigger that was a
better nuss or faithfuller,  yet he was risking his freedom to do it,
 was all tired out, too,  I see plain enough he’d been worked
main hard lately.  I liked  nigger for that; I tell you, gentlemen, a
nigger like that is worth a thous dollars-- kind treatment, too.  I
had everything I needed,   boy was doing as well re as he
would a done at home--better, maybe, because it was so quiet; but re I
_was_, with both of ‘m on my hs,  re I had to stick till about
dawn this morning; n some men in a skiff come by,  as good luck
would have it  nigger was setting by  pallet with his head propped
on his knees sound asleep; so I motioned m in quiet,  y slipped
up on him  grabbed him  tied him before he knowed what he was
about,  we never had no trouble.   boy being in a kind of a
flighty sleep, too, we muffled  oars  hitched  raft on, 
towed her over very nice  quiet,   nigger never made  least
row nor said a word from  start.  He ain’t no bad nigger, gentlemen;
that’s what I think about him.”

Somebody says:

“Well, it sounds very good, doctor, I’m obleeged to say.”

n  ors softened up a little, too,  I was mighty thankful
to that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn;  I was glad it was
according to my judgment of him, too; because I thought he had a good
heart in him  was a good man  first time I see him.  n y
all agreed that Jim had acted very well,  was deserving to have some
notice took of it,  reward.  So every one of m promised, right out
 hearty, that y wouldn’t cuss him no more.

n y come out  locked him up.  I hoped y was going to say he
could have one or two of  chains took off, because y was rotten
heavy, or could have meat  greens with his bread  water; but y
didn’t think of it,  I reckoned it warn’t best for me to mix in, but
I judged I’d get  doctor’s yarn to Aunt Sally somehow or or as
soon as I’d got through  breakers that was laying just ahead of
me--explanations, I mean, of how I forgot to mention about Sid being shot
when I was telling how him  me put in that dratted night paddling
around hunting  runaway nigger.

But I had plenty time.  Aunt Sally she stuck to  sick-room all day
 all night,  every time I see Uncle Silas mooning around I dodged
him.

Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better,  y said Aunt
Sally was gone to get a nap.  So I slips to  sick-room,  if I
found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for  family that
would wash. But he was sleeping,  sleeping very peaceful, too; 
pale, not fire-faced  way he was when he come.  So I set down 
laid for him to wake.  In about half an hour Aunt Sally comes gliding
in,  re I was, up a stump again!  She motioned me to be still, 
set down by me,  begun to whisper,  said we could all be joyful
now, because all  symptoms was first-rate,  he’d been sleeping
like that for ever so long,  looking better  peacefuller all 
time,  ten to one he’d wake up in his right mind.

So we set re watching,  by  by he stirs a bit,  opened his
eyes very natural,  takes a look,  says:

“Hello!--why, I’m at _home_!  How’s that?  Where’s  raft?”

“It’s all right,” I says.

“ _Jim_?”

“ same,” I says, but couldn’t say it pretty brash.  But he never
noticed, but says:

“Good!  Splendid!  _Now_ we’re all right  safe! Did you tell Aunty?”

I was going to say yes; but she chipped in  says:  “About what, Sid?”

“Why, about  way  whole thing was done.”

“What whole thing?”

“Why, __ whole thing.  re ain’t but one; how we set  runaway
nigger free--me  Tom.”

“Good l!  Set  run--What _is_  child talking about!  Dear, dear,
out of his head again!”

“_No_, I ain’t out of my _head_; I know all what I’m talking about.  We
_did_ set him free--me  Tom.  We laid out to do it,  we _done_ it.
  we done it elegant, too.”  He’d got a start,  she never checked
him up, just set  stared  stared,  let him clip along, 
I see it warn’t no use for _me_ to put in.  “Why, Aunty, it cost us a
power of work--weeks of it--hours  hours, every night, whilst you was
all asleep.  we had to steal cles,   sheet,   shirt,
 your dress,  spoons,  tin plates,  case-knives,  
warming-pan,   grindstone,  flour,  just no end of things,
 you can’t think what work it was to make  saws,  pens, 
inscriptions,  one thing or anor,  you can’t think _half_ 
fun it was.   we had to make up  pictures of coffins  things,
 nonnamous letters from  robbers,  get up  down 
lightning-rod,  dig  hole into  cabin,  made  rope ladder
 send it in cooked up in a pie,  send in spoons  things to work
with in your apron pocket--”

“Mercy sakes!”

“-- load up  cabin with rats  snakes  so on, for company for
Jim;  n you kept Tom here so long with  butter in his hat that
you come near spiling  whole business, because  men come before
we was out of  cabin,  we had to rush,  y heard us  let
drive at us,  I got my share,  we dodged out of  path  let
m go by,  when  dogs come y warn’t interested in us, but
went for  most noise,  we got our canoe,  made for 
raft,  was all safe,  Jim was a free man,  we done it all by
ourselves,  _wasn’t_ it bully, Aunty!”

“Well, I never heard  likes of it in all my born days!  So it was
_you_, you little rapscallions, that’s been making all this trouble,
 turned everybody’s wits clean inside out  scared us all most to
death.  I’ve as good a notion as ever I had in my life to take it out
o’ you this very minute.  To think, here I’ve been, night after night,
a--_you_ just get well once, you young scamp,  I lay I’ll tan  Old
Harry out o’ both o’ ye!”

But Tom, he _was_ so proud  joyful, he just _couldn’t_ hold in,
 his tongue just _went_ it--she a-chipping in,  spitting fire all
along,  both of m going it at once, like a cat convention;  she
says:

“_Well_, you get all  enjoyment you can out of it _now_, for mind I
tell you if I catch you meddling with him again--”

“Meddling with _who_?”  Tom says, dropping his smile  looking
surprised.

“With _who_?  Why,  runaway nigger, of course.  Who’d you reckon?”

Tom looks at me very grave,  says:

“Tom, didn’t you just tell me he was all right?  Hasn’t he got away?”

“_Him_?” says Aunt Sally; “ runaway nigger?  ‘Deed he hasn’t.
 y’ve got him back, safe  sound,  he’s in that cabin again,
on bread  water,  loaded down with chains, till he’s claimed or
sold!”

Tom rose square up in bed, with his eye hot,  his nostrils opening
 shutting like gills,  sings out to me:

“y hain’t no _right_ to shut him up!  SHOVE!-- don’t you lose a
minute.  Turn him loose! he ain’t no slave; he’s as free as any cretur
that walks this earth!”

“What _does_  child mean?”

“I mean every word I _say_, Aunt Sally,  if somebody don’t go, _I’ll_
go. I’ve knowed him all his life,  so has Tom, re.  Old Miss
Watson died two months ago,  she was ashamed she ever was going to
sell him down  river,  _said_ so;  she set him free in her
will.”

“n what on earth did _you_ want to set him free for, seeing he was
already free?”

“Well, that _is_ a question, I must say;  just like women!  Why,
I wanted  _adventure_ of it;  I’d a waded neck-deep in blood
to--goodness alive, _Aunt Polly!_”

If she warn’t sting right re, just inside  door, looking as
sweet  contented as an angel half full of pie, I wish I may never!

Aunt Sally jumped for her,  most hugged  head off of her, 
cried over her,  I found a good enough place for me under  bed,
for it was getting pretty sultry for us, seemed to me.   I peeped
out,  in a little while Tom’s Aunt Polly shook herself loose 
stood re looking across at Tom over her spectacles--kind of grinding
him into  earth, you know.   n she says:

“Yes, you _better_ turn y’r head away--I would if I was you, Tom.”

“Oh, deary me!” says Aunt Sally; “_Is_ he changed so?  Why, that ain’t
_Tom_, it’s Sid; Tom’s--Tom’s--why, where is Tom?  He was here a minute
ago.”

“You mean where’s Huck _Finn_--that’s what you mean!  I reckon I hain’t
raised such a scamp as my Tom all se years not to know him when I
_see_ him.  That _would_ be a pretty howdy-do. Come out from under that
bed, Huck Finn.”

So I done it.  But not feeling brash.

Aunt Sally she was one of  mixed-upest-looking persons I ever
see--except one,  that was Uncle Silas, when he come in  y told
it all to him.  It kind of made him drunk, as you may say,  he didn’t
know nothing at all  rest of  day,  preached a prayer-meeting
sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation, because 
oldest man in  world couldn’t a understood it.  So Tom’s Aunt Polly,
she told all about who I was,  what;  I had to up  tell how
I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom
Sawyer--she chipped in  says, “Oh, go on  call me Aunt Sally, I’m
used to it now,  ‘tain’t no need to change”--that when Aunt Sally took
me for Tom Sawyer I had to st it--re warn’t no or way, 
I knowed he wouldn’t mind, because it would be nuts for him, being
a mystery,  he’d make an adventure out of it,  be perfectly
satisfied.   so it turned out,  he let on to be Sid,  made
things as soft as he could for me.

 his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting
Jim free in her will;  so, sure enough, Tom Sawyer had gone  took
all that trouble  bor to set a free nigger free!  I couldn’t
ever underst before, until that minute  that talk, how he _could_
help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up.

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom 
_Sid_ had come all right  safe, she says to herself:

“Look at that, now!  I might have expected it, letting him go off that
way without anybody to watch him.  So now I got to go  trapse all
 way down  river, eleven hundred mile,  find out what that
creetur’s up to _this_ time, as long as I couldn’t seem to get any
answer out of you about it.”

“Why, I never heard nothing from you,” says Aunt Sally.

“Well, I wonder!  Why, I wrote you twice to ask you what you could mean
by Sid being here.”

“Well, I never got ‘em, Sis.”

Aunt Polly she turns around slow  severe,  says:

“You, Tom!”

“Well--_what_?” he says, kind of pettish.

“Don’t you what _me_, you impudent thing--h out m letters.”

“What letters?”

“_m_ letters.  I be bound, if I have to take a-holt of you I’ll--”

“y’re in  trunk.  re, now.   y’re just  same as y
was when I got m out of  office.  I hain’t looked into m, I
hain’t touched m.  But I knowed y’d make trouble,  I thought if
you warn’t in no hurry, I’d--”

“Well, you _do_ need skinning, re ain’t no mistake about it.   I
wrote anor one to tell you I was coming;  I s’pose he--”

“No, it come yesterday; I hain’t read it yet, but _it’s_ all right, I’ve
got that one.”

I wanted to offer to bet two dollars she hadn’t, but I reckoned maybe it
was just as safe to not to.  So I never said nothing.




CHAPTER  LAST

 first time I catched Tom private I asked him what was his idea, time
of  evasion?--what it was he’d planned to do if  evasion worked all
right  he managed to set a nigger free that was already free before?
 he said, what he had planned in his head from  start, if we got
Jim out all safe, was for us to run him down  river on  raft, 
have adventures plumb to  mouth of  river,  n tell him about
his being free,  take him back up home on a steamboat, in style,
 pay him for his lost time,  write word ahead  get out all
 niggers around,  have m waltz him into town with a torchlight
procession  a brass-b,  n he would be a hero,  so would
we.  But I reckoned it was about as well  way it was.

We had Jim out of  chains in no time,  when Aunt Polly  Uncle
Silas  Aunt Sally found out how good he helped  doctor nurse Tom,
y made a heap of fuss over him,  fixed him up prime,  give him
all he wanted to eat,  a good time,  nothing to do.   we had
him up to  sick-room,  had a high talk;  Tom give Jim forty
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient,  doing it up so good,
 Jim was pleased most to death,  busted out,  says:

“Dah, now, Huck, what I tell you?--what I tell you up dah on Jackson
islan’?  I _tole_ you I got a hairy breas’, en what’s de sign un it; en
I _tole_ you I ben rich wunst, en gwineter to be rich _agin_; en it’s
come true; en heah she is!  _dah_, now! doan’ talk to _me_--signs is
_signs_, mine I tell you; en I knowed jis’ ‘s well ‘at I ‘uz gwineter be
rich agin as I’s a-stannin’ heah dis minute!”

 n Tom he talked along  talked along,  says, le’s all three
slide out of here one of se nights  get an outfit,  go for
howling adventures amongst  Injuns, over in  Territory, for a
couple of weeks or two;  I says, all right, that suits me, but I
ain’t got no money for to buy  outfit,  I reckon I couldn’t get
none from home, because it’s likely pap’s been back before now,  got
it all away from Judge Thatcher  drunk it up.

“No, he hain’t,” Tom says; “it’s all re yet--six thous dollars
 more;  your pap hain’t ever been back since.  Hadn’t when I come
away, anyhow.”

Jim says, kind of solemn:

“He ain’t a-comin’ back no mo’, Huck.”

I says:

“Why, Jim?”

“Nemmine why, Huck--but he ain’t comin’ back no mo.”

But I kept at him; so at last he says:

“Doan’ you ‘member de house dat was float’n down de river, en dey wuz a
man in dah, kivered up, en I went in en unkivered him  didn’ let you
come in?  Well, den, you kin git yo’ money when you wants it, kase dat
wuz him.”

Tom’s most well now,  got his bullet around his neck on a watch-guard
for a watch,  is always seeing what time it is,  so re ain’t
nothing more to write about,  I am rotten glad of it, because if I’d
a knowed what a trouble it was to make a book I wouldn’t a tackled it,
 ain’t a-going to no more.  But I reckon I got to light out for 
Territory ahead of  rest, because Aunt Sally she’s going to adopt me
 sivilize me,  I can’t st it.  I been re before.

 END. YOURS TRULY, _HUCK FINN_.





End of  Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,
Complete, by Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HUCKLEBERRY FINN ***

***** This file should be named 76-0.htm or 76-0.zip ***** This 
all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/7/76/

Produced by David Widger. Previous editions produced by Ron Burkey 
Internet Wiretap

Updated editions will replace  previous one-- old editions will be
renamed.

Creating  works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in se works, so  Foundation (
you!) can copy  distribute it in  United States without permission
 without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in
 General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying 
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect 
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept  trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark,  may not be used if you charge for  eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with  rules is very easy. You
may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances  research. y may be modified 
printed  given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to  trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

 FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect  Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting  free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any or work associated in any way with  phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all  terms of  Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).

Section 1. General Terms of Use  Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, underst, agree
to  accept all  terms of this license  intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all 
terms of this agreement, you must cease using  return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work  you do not agree to be bound by 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from  person or
entity to whom you paid  fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
to be bound by  terms of this agreement. re are a few things that
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without
complying with  full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C
below. re are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works if you follow  terms of this agreement  help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“ Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in  collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all  individual works in
 collection are in  public domain in  United States. If an
individual work is in  public domain in  United States  you
are located in  United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on  work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support 
Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
 terms of this agreement for keeping  Project Gutenberg-tm name
associated with  work. You can easily comply with  terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in  same format with its attached
full Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with
ors.

1.D.  copyright laws of  place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside  United States, check
 laws of your country in addition to  terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing
or creating derivative works based on this work or any or Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  Foundation makes no representations concerning
 copyright status of any work in any country outside  United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  following sentence, with active links to, or or immediate
access to,  full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which 
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which  phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for  use of anyone anywhere at no cost  with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under  terms of  Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from  public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of  copyright holder),  work can be copied
 distributed to anyone in  United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
 phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on  work,
you must comply eir with  requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for  use of  work   Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with  permission of  copyright holder, your use  distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7  any additional
terms imposed by  copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to  Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with 
permission of  copyright holder found at  beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove  full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any or work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute
this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying  sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to  full terms of  Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to  distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format or
than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or or format used in  official
version posted on  official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.net), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to  user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of  work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or or form. Any alternate format must include  full
Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access
to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of  gross profits you derive from
 use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using  method you
already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  fee is owed to 
owner of  Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donate
royalties under this paragraph to  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each
date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your
periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such
 sent to  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at 
address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to 
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you
in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not
agree to  terms of  full Project Gutenberg-tm License. You
must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of  works
possessed in a physical medium  discontinue all use of  all access
to or copies of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in 
electronic work is discovered  reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of  work.

- You comply with all or terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both 
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation  Michael Hart, 
owner of  Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact  Foundation as
set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers  employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe  proofread
public domain works in creating  Project Gutenberg-tm collection.
Despite se efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,  
medium on which y may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or or intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or or medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for  “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3,  Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,  owner of  Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark,  any or party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs  expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT  FOUNDATION,  TRADEMARK OWNER, 
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF  POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect
in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive
a refund of  money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written
explanation to  person you received  work from. If you received
 work on a physical medium, you must return  medium with your
written explanation.  person or entity that provided you with 
defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received  work electronically,  person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive  work electronically in lieu of a refund. If  second copy
is also defective, you may dem a refund in writing without furr
opportunities to fix  problem.

1.F.4. Except for  limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OR
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or  exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates 
law of  state applicable to this agreement,  agreement shall be
interpreted to make  maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
 applicable state law.  invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void  remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify  hold  Foundation,
 trademark owner, any agent or employee of  Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement,  any volunteers associated with  production,
promotion  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs  expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of  following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work,  (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about  Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with  free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by  widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged  new computers. It exists
because of  efforts of hundreds of volunteers  donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers  financial support to provide volunteers with 
assistance y need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals  ensuring that  Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001,  Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure 
permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm  future generations. To
learn more about  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation 
how your efforts  donations can help, see Sections 3  4  
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3. Information about  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

 Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under  laws of  state
of Mississippi  granted tax exempt status by  Internal Revenue
Service.  Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number
is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to  Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to  full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws  your state’s laws.

 Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers  employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887,
email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links  up to date contact
information can be found at  Foundation’s web site  official page
at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information: Dr. Gregory B. Newby Chief Executive
 Director gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to  Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon  cannot survive without wide spread
public support  donations to carry out its mission of increasing
 number of public domain  licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by  widest array
of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
 IRS.

 Foundation is committed to complying with  laws regulating
charities  charitable donations in all 50 states of  United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform  it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork  many fees to meet  keep up
with se requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine  status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot  do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met  solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
 United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check  Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods  addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of or ways
including including checks, online payments  credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is  originator of  Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced  distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in  U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has  main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including
how to make donations to  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks,  how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


